"Find physiology of a particular protein"
"Find all (point) mutations that are associated to a specific disease"
"Find all (point) mutations that are associated to a specific gene/protein"
"Find all phenotypes for a particular (point) mutation"
"Find all (point) mutations that are associated with ageing process"
"Find all genes/proteins that are associated with ageing process"
"Find all nuclear proteins that interact with a specific mitochondrial protein"
"Find all structural and identification information for a specific gene/protein"
"Find all gene/proteins that are associated with a specific KEGG pathway"
"What are different Mitochondrial gene/protein functions?"
"What genes/proteins are part of a specific mitochondrial biological process?"
"How important are mitochondrial oxidants relative to other endogenous sources?"
"What is the origin of the mitochondrion?"
"Why are the mitochondria important?"
"How is the mitochondria used in Forensic Science?"
"What are the differences between nuclear and mitochondrial DNA?"
"Who was the Mitochondrial Eve?"
"What are the current research topics of mitochondria?"
"What are the applications/impacts of mitochondrial research?"
"What are the future hopes of mitochondrial research?"
"What makes up the mtDNA?"
"What are the final products of the biological processes?"
"Where does each biological processes (event) occur?"
"What is the structure and function of the inner membrane and elementary particles?"
"How do mitochondria replicate?"
"Are the mitochondria completely dependent on nuclear DNA and ribosomes?"
"What happens to old, worn-out mitochondria?"
"If the inner membrane is so impermeable, how do proteins enter?"
"How do mitochondria exchange ATP and ADP?"
"How are mitochondria involved in steroid hormone production?"
"Are mitochondria, rather than other endogeneous sources, the cell's most significant source of oxidants?"
"Does mitochondrial generation of oxidants increase with age?"
"What are the most significant targets of mitochondrial oxidant generation?"
"Which targets (proteins, lipids, DNA) are most susceptible to damage from ROS?"
"How are mtDNA Lesions (damage and somatic mutations) formed?"
"Is it true that mtDNA is more extensively damaged and less efficiently repaired than nuclear DNA?"
"How significant are mtDNA lesions (damage and somatic mutations), Do mtDNA lesions matter?"
"How are mitochondria regulated during ageing?"
"What are the effects of changes in endocrine function on mitochondria during ageing?"
"Does this represent the slowing of a pathological process of mitochondrial damage or merely the attenuating of an age-related change in endocrine control of metabolism?"
"What experiments on mitochondria has taken place?"
"What studies have been already taken place?"
"How is mitochondrial turnover affected by ageing?"
"How heterogeneous is the population of mitochondria?"
"Are mitochondria determinants of species maximum life-span potential?"
"Are the mitochondria of long-lived species designed to minimize oxidant generation?"
"Why has only one mtDNA mutation been described so far in adult nephrology?"
"Why do children with MC commonly present with a renal phenotype that is often quite different from adults?"
"How does a mutation in mtDNA lead to disease at the cellular level"
"How can a single mtDNA point mutation result in such a variety of renal- and non-renal phenotypes in isolation or combined?"
"Why are some regions of the nephron seemingly more sensitive to mitochondrial dysfunction and damage by mitochondrial toxins?"
"What can be done to diagnose and treat MC, now and in the future?"
"How important are mitochondrial oxidants in determining overall cellular oxidative stress?"
"What are the mechanisms of mitochondrial oxidant generation?"
"How are lesions and mutations in mtDNA formed?"
"How important are mtDNA lesions and mutations in causing mitochondrial dysfunction?"
"How does this regulation change during ageing?"
"What are the dynamics of mitochondrial turnover?"
"What is the relationship between mitochondrial damage and lipofuscinogenesis?"
"What are the relationships among mitochondria, apoptosis, and ageing?"
"How can mitochondrial function (ATP generation and the establishment of a membrane potential) and dysfunction (oxidant generation) be modulated and degenerative senscence thereby treated?"
"What is the mitochondrial free radical theory of ageing?"
"Is nitric oxide, which can react with O2- to generate the oxidant peroxynitrite, present or generated in mitochondria and significant factor in mitochondrial decay?"
"Association between Mitochondrial Issues and Autism?"
"What available resources are there for mitochondria? (Technology? Databases? Bioinformatics tools? societies? Research groups? Websites? Communities? Literature? Training? Forums? Blogs? Publications? )"
"What related literature is there for mitochondria? (disease? biological process? experiments?)"
"Associated distribution of mitochondria?"
"Previous studies into mitochondromics? (bioinformatics and mitochondria)"
"What are mitochondria and what do they do?"
"Future developments of mitochondrial research? (genetic counselling, nuclear-mitochondrial interactions, anial models, novel treatments, environmental/extrenal factors)"
"Why are Mitochondria Essential for Life?"
"A long-standing question of mitochondriology therefore was which process makes mitochondria and why?"
"What is the biological significance of the brain-specific tubulin-polymerization perturbation protein (TPPP/p25)?"
"What is the biological significance of the two mitofusin proteins present in the outer mitochondrial membrane of mammalian cells?"
"How might a mutation in mtDNA (such as A3243G) lead to very different disorders such as MELAS and FSGS?"
"Is Mitochondrial TERT involved in dietary restriction?"
"Is TERC & TERT expression changed under dietary restriction?"
"Does Mitochondrial TERT have a function in brain ageing & age related neuron-degenerative diseases such as Alzheimer's disease?"
"Different mitochondrial behaviour for different ethnic groups?"
"Dual localizations? Auxiliary localizations? Auxiliary/Secondary function?"
"Can low-invasive biofluid (urine) reveal more information on metabolic responses in RCD?"
"Do metabolic biosignatures/biomarkers exist for RCD?"
"Does metabolic information provide more value to scoring criteria? (pre-biopsy)"
"Diagnostic criteria for mitochondrial diseases"
"Functional characterization of human REXO2, a putative mitochondrial Rnase"
"Annotation"
"Morphology?"
"What was the bacterial ancestor, and which living bacteria are most closely related to this ancestor?"
"What was the ancestor of the proto-eukaryote?"
"When did the endosymbiosis take place and was it a unique event in the history of evolution of life on earth?"
"Do these crista junctions represent some real boundary that restricts the diffusion of ions from the space between the outer membrane and the inner boundary membrane (inter-membrane) to the space inside the tubular or lamellar cristae (intracristal)?"
"Are the proteins differentially distributed between these two spaces, or between the two membrane domains?"
"Can the membrane potential become a localized property i.e. Is it possible that the (symbols?) is not uniform along the entire surface of the inner membrane?"
"It is apparent that this unorthodox view of the inner membrane also has implications for understanding mitochondrial biogenesis and the targeted insertion of proteins into the inner membrane. What maintains  the different inner membrane domain?"
"What happens in mature neurons?"
"Do mitochondria turn over at the nerve terminal, to be replaced, or are mitochondria shuttling back and forth during their lifetime?"
"What is the order of assembly?"
"How can two electrons from quinol be directed into two separate pathways?"
"What controls respiration?"
"Assuming that NADH and O2 are present in abundance, is therefore the ETC the rate-limiting component in respiration, and is there a specific complex within the ETC that dominantly controls its activity? How?"
"How is this homodimer with a normally restricted 'channel' for ATP or ADP converted to a megapore?"
"Does it make any difference when ATP production is limited by a complex V mutation or by a mutation in the ETC?"
"What physiological consequences and distinct symptoms would be expected?"
"How does a new mutation in one mtDNA molecule in a germline cell (or early embryo) become amplified relative to the wild type mtDNA population in somatic cells?"
"How many generations does it take before symptoms appear in an individual who is found to be heteroplasmic with >50% mutant mtDNA, or even homoplasmic with ~100% mutant mtDNA?"
"Is there any selective occurring at any stage in oogenesis?"
"Is additional selective pressure operative in somantic cells in specific tissues?"
"When during oogeneis or embryogenesis did the mutation arise and what selective mechanisms for the observed tissue distribution in the affected children?"
"How does a particular mtDA mutation become dominant during neuroplastic transformation and expansion of a clonal tumour cell population?"
"Is there a cause and effect relationship?"
"How is the rapid proliferation of tumour cells linked to selective replication/amplification of the mutated mtDNA?"
"It is accepted that mitochondria from the sperm enter the oocyte during fertilization. Do they persist and contribute to the population of mtDNAs in the developing organism?"
"Is a partial defect in complex I (NADH-ubiquinone oxidoreductase) due to a point mutation in ND4 different than a defect in the same complex due to reduced availability of a tRNA required to translate subunits for this complex?"
"Does it matter how much respiration and oxidative phosphorylation are reduced, regardless of the mechanism?"
"Is the consequence of an altered tRNA structure on efficiency of translation different in different cell types?"
"LHON is the most puzzling disease because of the highly restricted set of neurons affected. And why the delay onset of the disease?"
"What extent is mitochondrial morphology linked to the biochemical functions of the organelle?"
"How is the shape of mitochondria regulated?"
"What molecular mechanisms mediate transmission of mitochondria during cell division?"
"What is the contribution of mitochondria apoptosis?"
"How is nuclear and mitochondrial gene expression co-ordinated to guarantee cellular homeostasis?"
"Are there any other crucial functions that are performed within the organelle?"
"How many polypeptides make a mitochondrion?"
"How do individual mitochondria recognize each other?"
"How is fusion regulated?"
"Is fusion important for mitochondrial function?"
"Can mitochondria transfer DNA to the nucleus?"
"Are mitochondria natural cancer fighting cells?"
"What defines human ageing?"
"Are free radicals always bad?"
"How does mitochondria affect life and death?"
"How do mitochondria interact with apoptosis, autophagy and telemores?"
"What could a person learn from having their mitochondrial DNA sequenced?"
