|
Research Focus
Mitochondrial building blocks
Robert E. Jensen, Cory D. Dunn, Matt J. Youngman and Hiromi Sesaki
Department of Cell Biology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 725 North Wolfe Street, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA
Despite many genomic and proteomic attempts,
approximately half of all mitochondrial proteins remain
unidentified. Moreover, the composition of mitochon-
dria varies in different mammalian cell types and the
details of this tissue specificity are unclear. Two recent
reports provide a major advance in our understanding
of mitochondrial function. Sickmann et al. used an
exhaustive proteomic approach and came very close to
identifying the complete set of yeast mitochondrial pro-
teins. Mootha et al. examined mitochondria from
mouse brain, heart, kidney and liver cells, finding that a
surprising fraction of the proteins are expressed in only
a subset of tissues.
Mitochondria play pivotal roles in both the life and death of
eukaryotic cells. During cell growth, they are best known
for their predominant role in ATP production but they also
contribute to a wide variety of other cell processes, such as
ion homeostasis and the metabolism of amino acids, heme,
lipids and urea [1]. Mitochondria are also central players
in senescence, as well as in programmed cell death [2]. Not
surprisingly, defects in human mitochondrial function lead
to a multitude of problems, including cancer, cardiomyo-
pathies, diabetes, obesity, and many types of neurodegen-
erative disease [3]. Recent genomic and proteomic studies
suggest that mammalian mitochondria are composed of at
least a thousand different proteins, representing,5–15%
of the eukaryotic proteome. Because mitochondrial DNA
encodes only a handful of proteins (13 in humans and 28 in
yeast), the genes for the vast majority of these proteins are
located in the nucleus. Although many mitochondrial
proteins are already known, particularly those involved in
oxidative phosphorylation and the Krebs cycle, nearly half
of all mitochondrial proteins remain unidentified. These
missing proteins preclude a comprehensive understanding
of mitochondria both in sickness and in health.
Over the past few years, a variety of approaches have
been used in attempts to identify the full set of
mitochondrial proteins, a few of which are highlighted in
Table 1. One commonly used method is a proteomic survey
of purified mitochondria, such as the recent analysis of
human heart mitochondria [4]. Solubilized mitochondrial
proteins are separated using procedures such as 1D or 2D
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE) or liquid
chromatography. Proteins extracted from gels or those
located in different column fractions are digested by
protease, and the peptides are then identified by mass
spectrometry. In addition to biochemical techniques,
several genetic and genomic approaches have been used
to expand the catalog of mitochondrial proteins (see Box 1
for a brief description of a few of these methods). Computer
analyses, such as the search for open reading frames
containing mitochondrial targeting signals [5], have also
uncovered new proteins. Specialized databases, including
MITOP [6] and MitoProteome [7], have been developed to
house all the known and predicted mitochondrial proteins.
As mentioned, despite all the different approaches that
have been used, it is estimated that nearly half of all
mitochondrial proteins still remain unidentified. Below we
summarize two recent papers that go a long way towards
Box 1. Some genomic approaches for a mitochondrial
inventory
Genomic GFP tagging and fluorescence microscopy
Using oligonucleotide-directed homologous recombination, each of
the known 6234 open reading frames (ORFs) in yeast were tagged at
the 3
0
end with green fluorescent protein (GFP). The subcellular
location of the fusion protein was determined in the yeast strains
expressing detectable GFP (70% of the strains) by fluorescence
microscopy. The distribution of many of the fusion proteins was
confirmed using reference proteins fused to red fluorescent protein
or organelle-specific dyes.
Protein splicing of split GFP in the mitochondrial matrix
cDNAs were randomly fused to the N-terminal half of GFP and were
introduced into cells expressing the C-terminal half of GFP in the
mitochondrial matrix. If the cDNA encoded a protein that was
imported into mitochondria, full-length GFP was reconstituted in the
matrix by protein splicing elements carried in both halves of GFP.
Positive GFP signals were detected by automatic cell sorting.
Epitope tagging and immunofluorescence microscopy
By cloning polymerase-chain-reaction-amplified genes and by
transpositional mutagenesis, ,60% of all yeast ORFs were epitope-
tagged. The cellular location of each fusion protein was then
determined by immunofluorescence microscopy, using antibodies
to the epitope.
mRNAs that cofractionate with mitochondria
Polyribosomes bound to the surface of mitochondria are enriched
with mRNAs encoding imported mitochondrial proteins. Using a
genome-wide approach, new mitochondrial proteins were identified
by the analysis of nuclear-encoded mRNAs that cofractionate with
mitochondria.
Screening yeast mutants for mitochondrial function and
morphology
A collection of deletion mutants, representing all of the nonessential
yeast genes, was screened for its ability to grow on a nonfermentable
medium, which is an indicator of mitochondrial function. In addition,
mutants were stained with a mitochondria-specific dye, and those
defective in the normal shape and distribution of mitochondria were
examined by fluorescence microscopy.
Corresponding author: Robert E. Jensen (rjensen@jhmi.edu).
Update TRENDS in Cell Biology Vol.14 No.5 May 2004
www.sciencedirect.com
solving this problem, and significantly add to our under-
standing of mitochondrial complexity and function.
The yeast mitochondrial proteome
A major step towards a complete inventory of mitochon-
drial proteins has recently been accomplished using a
proteomic approach with highly purified yeast mitochon-
dria [8]. In this report by Sickmann et al. [8], 750 proteins
were identified, of which 436 had been previously shown to
be mitochondrial proteins. Based on the observation that
all of the known subunits of the pyruvate dehydrogenase
complex, the Krebs cycle enzymes and the inner mem-
brane complexes of oxidative phosphorylation were
detected, and that 65 of the 73 known mitochondrial
ribosomal proteins were found, it is estimated that at least
90% of the total yeast mitochondrial proteins were
identified in their study. Before this study, the largest
proteomic survey identified 615 proteins using human
heart mitochondria, representing only ,45% of the
predicted total [4]. In this and other early attempts, it is
likely that many mitochondrial proteins were not ident-
ified due to their low abundance or poor solubility.
Therefore, to maximize the chance of identifying polypep-
tides with greatly different properties, Sickmann et al.
used several methods to liberate mitochondrial proteins,
including 1D-PAGE, 2D-PAGE, liquid chromatography
and multidimensional chromatography, before their anal-
ysis by matrix-assisted time-of-flight or tandem mass
spectroscopy. Two mitochondria-associated fractions (pro-
teins removed from mitochondria by salt or protease
treatment) were also analyzed.
Among the 750 proteins identified by Sickmann et al.
there are several surprises. For example, more than 100 of
the proteins had previously been reported to reside in a
cellular compartment other than mitochondria. Although
a few of these proteins are clearly plasma membrane,
vacuolar or other cellular contaminants, most are likely to
be bone fide mitochondrial proteins. Sickmann et al. chose
several proteins that had been localized to another
organelle and showed that each was imported into isolated
mitochondria in an energy-dependent manner. Although a
dual localization in mitochondria and other compartments
can explain the discrepancy with some of these proteins, it
is likely that many will turn out to be exclusively
mitochondrial. For example, about half of the contentious
proteins had been localized using only a tagging approach
[9,10]. Because Sickmann et al. noted that many known
mitochondrial proteins are found in the cytosol, endoplas-
mic reticulum, vacuole or nucleus when they are tagged, it
should not be a surprise that other fusion proteins are
mislocalized to the mitochondria – a clear warning to
those of us who rely solely on tags to determine where our
favorite protein resides.
Another surprise from the current work is that three
proteins thought to reside fully inside the mitochondria
(lactate dehydrogenase, cytochrome b
2
and the matrix-
localized mtHsp70 protein) were detected in a surface-
associated fraction with their N-terminal targeting signals
still intact. Because the precursor form is not normally
seen in cells, it was taken for granted that mitochondrial
proteins are very rapidly imported and completely
processed to their mature form. Clearly, this might not
always be the case and provides a mechanism for some
proteins to act at more than one mitochondrial location.
A survey of mitochondrial proteins from brain, heart,
kidney, and liver
Although yeast mitochondria are poised to deliver the
complete catalog of proteins, determining how mitochon-
dria are customized for the metabolic demands of diverse
cell types requires another line of attack. It is known that
the activity of many biosynthetic and catabolic pathways,
as well as the size, shape and number of the mitochondria,
exhibit remarkable variation among different mammalian
tissues. To pinpoint the molecular basis for this diversity,
Mootha et al. [11] carried out a proteomic survey of
mitochondria isolated from mouse brain, heart, kidney,
and liver cells. A total of 399 proteins were identified and,
when combined with the mitochondrial proteins already
known, as well as those from the recent human heart
proteome [4], the array of mammalian mitochondrial
proteins now numbers more than 700. For many of these
mitochondrial genes, the RNA expression profiles from a
wide range of tissues are known. Mootha et al. identified
additional candidates for mitochondrial proteins among
subnetworks of genes with correlated expression patterns.
For example, the group of genes known to be involved in
oxidative phosphorylation, b-oxidation and the tricar-
boxylic acid cycle also contains 11 genes of unknown
function. Although some of the 11 are likely to encode
mitochondrial proteins, others might encode non-mito-
chondrial proteins, such as transcription factors required
for the coordinated expression of the subnetwork. In either
case, the RNA analysis is yielding exciting new infor-
mation that complements the proteomic data.
Probably the most striking result from the proteomic
comparison of mitochondria from brain, heart, kidney, and
liver is the large number proteins that are missing from
one or more tissues. When this information is combined
with the RNA expression data, it appears that only half of
all mitochondrial proteins are found in every cell type.
Some of the similarities and differences were anticipated.
Table 1. Some previous attempts at a mitochondrial inventory
Approach Number of mitochondrial proteins Organism Refs
Proteomics 615 Human [4]
Genomic GFP
a
tagging and fluorescence microscopy 526 Yeast [10]
Protein splicing of split GFP in the mitochondrial matrix 70 Mouse [15]
Epitope tagging and immunofluorescence microscopy 332 Yeast [9]
mRNAs that cofractionate with mitochondria ,200 Yeast [16]
Screening yeast mutants for mitochondrial function and morphology .300 Yeast [17]
a
Abbreviation: GFP, green fluorescent protein.
Update TRENDS in Cell Biology Vol.14 No.5 May 2004
216
www.sciencedirect.com
For instance, among the ubiquitous proteins are those
involved in bioenergetics, and examples of tissue-specific
expression (e.g. the proteins required for steroidogenesis in
adrenal cells or heme biosynthesis in bone marrow) are well
known. However, the possibility that hundreds of mitochon-
drial proteins vary in their amounts from one cell type to the
next was not expected. Just how unique mitochondria are in
different organs awaits the quantitative proteomic and RNA
analysis from many more tissues.
Concluding remarks
The survey of yeast and mammalian mitochondria has
yielded more than 200 new proteins. A few of these have
already been shown to be components of known pathways,
such as a new subunit of complex I of the electron transport
chain [12]. Others are likely to play roles in poorly
understood processes, such as the control of organelle
shape, number, and inheritance (Figure 1). One of the
remaining challenges will be to determine the functions of
all these new proteins. Because they number more than 200,
novel methods could be needed to expedite these analyses.
For example, it might be helpful to group genes with similar
mRNA expression patterns, or proteins according to their
location within mitochondria (i.e. outer membrane, inner
membrane, intermembrane space or matrix). Systematic
analysis of mitochondrial protein complexes might also
provide important information. Ultimately, elucidating the
function of many of the new mitochondrial proteins might
require the slow grind of individual investigators chasing
down the role of individual proteins.
Another remaining challenge is to complete the mito-
chondrial proteome. The mammalian inventory is the
furthest from being done, with hundreds of proteins
missing. More exhaustive proteomic analyses, similar to
those used by Sickmann et al., are clearly needed. How-
ever, even though almost all of the yeast mitochondrial
proteins have now been identified, it might be very difficult
to finish the job. Some of the missing proteins could be of
such low abundance or solubility that new biochemical
methods will be needed for their detection. Other
mitochondrial proteins might require yeast cells to be
grown under special conditions or on different media for
their expression. Because mitochondria from different
mammalian cell types show a wide range of tissue-specific
diversity, completing the human mitochondrial proteome
will be even more difficult. Many of the remaining
mammalian and yeast proteins could, therefore, await
identification by novel genetic or genomic methods. None-
theless, the work by both Sickmann et al. and Mootha et al.
provides a crucial framework for ultimately understanding
the complexity of mitochondrial function and the contri-
bution of this organelle to disease.
References
1 Schatz, G. (1995) Mitochondria: beyond oxidative phosphorylation.
Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1271, 123–126
2 Newmeyer, D.D. and Ferguson-Miller, S. (2003) Mitochondria: releas-
ing power for life and unleashing the machineries of death. Cell 112,
481–490
3 Wallace, D.C. (1999) Mitochondrial diseases in man and mouse.
Science 283, 1482–1488
4 Taylor, S.W. et al. (2003) Characterization of the human heart
mitochondrial proteome. Nat. Biotechnol. 21, 281–286
5 Claros, M.G. and Vincens, P. (1996) Computational method to predict
mitochondrially imported proteins and their targeting sequences. Eur.
J. Biochem. 241, 779–786
6 Scharfe, C. et al. (2000) MITOP, the mitochondrial proteome database:
2000 update. Nucleic Acids Res. 28, 155–158
7 Cotter, D. et al. (2004) MitoProteome: mitochondrial protein sequence
database and annotation system. Nucleic Acids Res. 32, D463–D467
8 Sickmann, A. et al. (2003) The proteome of Saccharomyces cerevisiae
mitochondria. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 100, 13207–13212
9 Kumar, A. et al. (2002) Subcellular localization of the yeast proteome.
Genes Dev. 16, 707–719
10 Huh, W.K. et al. (2003) Global analysis of protein localization in
budding yeast. Nature 425, 686–691
11 Mootha, V.K. et al. (2003) Integrated analysis of protein composition,
tissue diversity, and gene regulation in mouse mitochondria. Cell 115,
629–640
12 Fearnley, I.M. et al. (2001) GRIM-19, a cell death regulatory gene
product, is a subunit of bovine mitochondrial NADH:ubiquinone
oxidoreductase (complex I). J. Biol. Chem. 276, 38345–38348
13 Bereiter-Hahn, J. and Voth, M. (1994) Dynamics of mitochondria in
Figure 1. Fluorescent images of mitochondria. Images shown are of mitochondria in (a) Saccharomyces cerevisiae cells expressing a matrix-targeted green fluorescent
protein and in (b) bovine pulmonary-artery endothelial cells stained with the mitochondria-specific dye MitoTrackere. Although most yeast cells contain ,5–10 tubule-
shaped mitochondria, mammalian cells show much more variety in the shape of their mitochondria, ranging from the tubules seen in the endothelial cells to small spheres
in liver cells and large, round organelles in corneal cells [13,14]. The number of mitochondria in mammalian cells can also vary greatly. Scale bars correspond to 10 mm.
Update TRENDS in Cell Biology Vol.14 No.5 May 2004
217
www.sciencedirect.com
living cells: shape changes, dislocations, fusion, and fission of
mitochondria. Microsc. Res. Tech. 27, 198–219
14 Tandler, B. and Hoppel, C.L. (1972) Mitochondria, Academic Press
15 Ozawa, T. et al. (2003) A genetic approach to identifying mitochondrial
proteins. Nat. Biotechnol. 21, 287–293
16 Marc, P. et al. (2002) Genome-wide analysis of mRNAs targeted to
yeast mitochondria. EMBO Rep. 3, 159–164
17 Dimmer, K.S. et al. (2002) Genetic basis of mitochondrial function
and morphology in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Mol. Biol. Cell 13,
847–853
0962-8924/$ - see front matter q 2004 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.tcb.2004.03.006
O-GlcNAc modification: a nutritional sensor that
modulates proteasome function
Natasha E. Zachara and Gerald W. Hart
Department of Biological Chemistry, The Johns Hopkins University Medical School, Baltimore, MD 21205-2185, USA
The addition of O-linked b-N-acetylglucosamine
(O-GlcNAc) to serine and threonine residues is a post-
translational modification of nucleocytoplasmic
proteins that is thought to act in a manner analogous
to protein phosphorylation. Recent work shows that
many proteins of the metazoan proteasome are modi-
fied by O-GlcNAc and that the level of glycosylation is
responsive to the nutritional state of the cell. More-
over, increased glycosylation of the 19S (or PA700)
regulatory subcomplex has been correlated with
decreased proteasomal activity, suggesting a new
model of proteasomal regulation.
TheadditionofO-linkedb-N-acetylglucosamine(O-GlcNAc)
to serine and threonine residues of nuclear and cyto-
plasmic proteins (Table 1) is an essential post-transla-
tional modification of metazoans [1]. O-GlcNAc levels
change rapidly and dynamically in response to cellular
stress [2], extracellular stimuli, morphogens, the cell cycle
and development, which alludes to key roles for O-GlcNAc
in regulating cellular function [1]. On key nuclear and
cytoplasmic proteins, such as RNA polymerase II [3],
endothelial nitric oxide synthase [4,5], SV-40 large T
antigen [6], estrogen receptor-b (ER-b) [7] and the c-Myc
proto-oncogene [8], glycosylation and phosphorylation
have been mapped to the same amino acid, suggesting a
complex interplay exists between these two post-transla-
tional modifications (Figure 1). Recent work from two
groups shows that the metazoan proteasome is modified
extensively by O-GlcNAc [9] and that increased glycosyla-
tion ablates the ATPase activity of the 19S (or PA700)
subcomplex towards some substrates [10]. O-GlcNAc
modification of proteasomal function appears to be
dependent on the nutritional status of cells, providing
further evidence for the roles of O-GlcNAc in nutritional
sensing and subsequent cellular regulation.
Between 2 and 5% of the glucose transported into cells is
converted to UDP-GlcNAc (the donor sugar for the
biosynthesis of O-GlcNAc) through the hexosamine bio-
synthetic pathway [11]. Elevated extracellular glucose or
glucosamine concentrations lead to increased modification
of intracellular proteins with O-GlcNAc [12]. Moreover,
the substrate specificity of O-GlcNAc transferase (OGT),
the enzyme that catalyzes the addition of O-GlcNAc,
changes at different UDP-GlcNAc concentrations [13].
Recent in vitro and in vivo data support a model in which
increased UDP-GlcNAc levels, due to hyperglycemia,
result in increased O-GlcNAc levels, leading to insulin
resistance – a hallmark of type II diabetes [14–17]. These
data and others have led researchers to propose that
Table 1. Key cellular proteins are modified by O-GlcNAc
a,b
Functional protein group Examples
Chaperones HSP27; HSP70; HSP90; HSC70; HSP90
Transcription factors and polymerises RNA polymerase II large subunit; Sp1; c-Fos; c-Jun; c-Myc; p53; b-catenin; NF-kB; YY1;
RB; CREB
Nuclear pore proteins and chromatin-associated proteins p62; Nup153; Nup180; Nup214; Nup358
RNA-binding proteins hnRNP G; eIF4a; ribosomal proteins
Kinases and adaptor proteins CKII; IRS1; IRS2; GSK3b; PtdIns 3-kinase
Cytoskeletal proteins Keratins 8, 13, 18; neurofilaments H, M, L; band 4.1; talin; vinculin; ankyrin G;
synapsin 1; myosin; E-cadherin; tubulin; tau; AP-3; AP-188; b-APP; b-synuclein
Others eNOS; enolase; glycogen synthase; glut-1; OGT
a
Abbreviations: AP, clathrin assembly protein; b-APP, b-amyloid precursor protein; CKII, casein kinase II; CREB, cAMP-response-element-binding protein; eIF4a, eukaryotic
initiation factor 4a; eNOS, endothelial nitric oxide synthase; glut-1, glucose transporter-1; GSK3b, glycogen synthase kinase3b; hnRNP G, heterogeneous nuclear
ribonucleoprotein G; HSP, heat shock protein; IRS, insulin-receptor substrate; NF-kB, nuclear factor-kB; Nup, nucleoporin; O-GlcNAc, O-linked b-N-acetylglucosamine;
OGT, O-GlcNAc transferase; p62, nuclear pore protein 62; PtdIns 3-kinase, phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase; RB, retinoblastoma protein; YY1, yin yang-1.
b
More than 100 proteins that are modified by O-GlcNAc have been identified. For comprehensive details, see Ref. [26].
Corresponding author: Gerald W. Hart (gwhart@jhmi.edu).
Update TRENDS in Cell Biology Vol.14 No.5 May 2004
218
www.sciencedirect.com
