J Mol Cell Cardiol 33, 1065–1089 (2001)
doi:10.1006/jmcc.2001.1378, available online at http://www.idealibrary.com on
Review Article
Mitochondrial Dysfunction in Cardiac
Disease: Ischemia–Reperfusion, Aging,
and Heart Failure
Edward J. Lesnefsky
1,5
, Shadi Moghaddas
1
, Bernard Tandler
6
, Janos Kerner
4
and Charles L. Hoppel
2,3,5
Departments of
1
Divisions of Cardiology and
2
Clinical Pharmacology and Departments of
3
Pharmacology and
4
Nutrition,
5
Case Western Reserve University and Geriatric Research, Education
and Clinical Center, Louis Stokes Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Cleveland, Ohio, 44106 and the
6
Institute of Environmental and Human Health, Texas Tech University, Lubbock, TX 79409, USA
(Received 21 February 2001, accepted in revised form 1 March 2001)
E. J. L,S.M,B.T,J.K  C. L. H. Mitochondrial Dysfunction in Cardiac
Disease: Ischemia–Reperfusion, Aging, and Heart Failure. Journal of Molecular and Cellular Cardiology (2001) 33,
1065–1089. Mitochondria contribute to cardiac dysfunction and myocyte injury via a loss of metabolic capacity
and by the production and release of toxic products. This article discusses aspects of mitochondrial structure and
metabolism that are pertinent to the role of mitochondria in cardiac disease. Generalized mechanisms of
mitochondrial-derived myocyte injury are also discussed, as are the strengths and weaknesses of experimental
models used to study the contribution of mitochondria to cardiac injury. Finally, the involvement of mitochondria
in the pathogenesis of specific cardiac disease states (ischemia, reperfusion, aging, ischemic preconditioning, and
cardiomyopathy) is addressed.  2001 Academic Press
K W: Cytochrome; Fatty acid oxidation; Reactive oxygen species; Apoptosis; Preconditioning; Aging;
Ischemia; Reperfusion.
of inner membrane invaginate into the matrix as
Mitochondrial Morphology
cristae. The cristae include the electron transport
chain (ETC), phosphorylation apparatus, and mem-Mitochondrial structure (Figs 1–3) provides com-
partmentalization of mitochondrial metabolism. An brane transporters. Pedicles are portions of inner
membrane that connect the cristae to the innerouter membrane encapsulates the organelle, while
an inner membrane surrounds the central matrix boundary membrane (Figs 3 and 4). The inner
boundary membrane participates in transport re-space of the mitochondrion. The outer membrane
provides a permeability barrier to cytosol molecules actions, including the formation of contact sites.
The mitochondrial matrix space contains metaboliclarger than 1500 Da and separates the in-
termembrane space from the cytosol. The in- enzymes, mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA), and RNA.
Contact sites are dynamic structures that involvetermembrane space has an ionic composition
similar to the cytosol,
1
and contains a distinct group a fusion of the inner and outer mitochondrial mem-
branes, and are key participants in protein import;
3
of proteins, including the mobile electron carrier,
cytochrome c.
2
The inner mitochondrial membrane energy coupling, with the cytosol via formation of
creatine phosphate;
4
and uptake of fatty acids of ox-consists of regions of inner boundary membrane
that are parallel to the outer membrane. Portions idative metabolism.
5,6
Contact sites in heart mito-
Please address all correspondence to: Edward J. Lesnefsky, M.D., Cardiology Section, Medical Service 111(W), Louis Stokes VA Medical
Center, 10701 East Boulevard, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA. E-mail: EXL9@po.cwru.edu
0022–2828/01/061065+25 $35.00/0  2001 Academic Press
E. J. Lesnefsky et al.1066
Figure 3 Schematic drawing of a mitochondrion show-
ing contact sites. Contact sites consist of a fusion of
the inner and outer membranes and contain octameric
creatine kinase. The inner mitochondrial membrane is
subdivided into inner boundary membrane, pedicles and
cristae. See text for details.
Figure 1 Electron micrograph of isolated hamster car-
diac mitochondria showing the multiplicity of cristae
still in their native configuration and inner and outer
mitochondrial membranes. ×28 000.
Figure 4 Scanning electron micrograph of a mito-
chondrion within an oncocyte of the human sub-
mandibular gland. This sample was prepared by
macerating the tissue for a long period in osmium tetr-
oxide, which removes all soluble components, but which
leaves membranes intact. A crista is seen en face; it is
connected to the boundary membrane by numerous
pedicles, several of which are indicated by arrows.
×35 000. (Micrograph courtesy of Alessandro Riva.)
from the mitochondria to the cytosol.
4,7
A potential
Figure 2 Classical view of an isolated mitochondrion
role for contact sites in the mitochondrial uptake ofwith major structures identified.
long-chain fatty acids has been shown in rat liver
mitochondria,
5,6,8,9
and a similar role has been pro-
posed in heart mitochondria.
10
The number of con-chondria are composed of porin in the outer mem-
brane, the octameric form of creatine kinase in the tact sites varies during oxidative metabolism, with an
increased number of contact sites present in activelyintermembrane space, and the inner membrane ad-
enine nucleotide translocase, facilitating energy flux respiring mitochondria.
11
Mitochondria in Cardiac Disease 1067
the predominant isoform in heart, to malonyl-CoA
Mitochondria in Cell Physiology and
(K
i
≅0.1 afii9839) (Fig. 5).
22
Malonyl-CoA has been pro-
Metabolism
posed as a key component in the regulation of fuel
selection by mitochondria. Although this hypo-
Regulation of mitochondrial substrate selection
thesis is supported by experimental data, un-
answered questions remain. First, the mechanism
The principal substrates for mitochondrial oxidation
that distinguishes between acetyl-CoA derived from
are carbohydrates and fats. Carbohydrate meta-
the oxidation of either pyruvate or fatty acids re-
bolism generates pyruvate for mitochondrial up-
mains unclear. Are there separate mitochondrial
take. Triglyceride hydrolysis or myocyte uptake of
acetyl-CoA pools? One pool derived from pyruvate
fatty acids provides acyl-groups for mitochondrial
oxidation would be amenable to export to the cy-
activation and uptake. Mitochondrial substrate se-
tosol for malonyl-CoA synthesis, whereas the other
lection is tightly controlled in response to exogenous
pool, derived from afii9826-oxidation of fatty acids, is re-
substrate availability and the (patho)physiologic
stricted to the matrix. Second, the reported malonyl-
state of the myocyte.
12–16
Pyruvate metabolism re-
CoA content in the heart (approx. 2–5 afii9839)
23,24
quires uptake by the pyruvate transporter followed
is several-fold higher than the K
i
of malonyl-CoA
by oxidation by pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH) to
for CPT-I. Yet fatty acids still are oxidized, providing
acetyl-CoA. The enzymes involved in fatty acid
the main fuel for the heart under resting conditions.
activation and transport are located in the outer
To resolve this apparent conundrum, a com-
membrane and contact sites.
12
Fatty acid oxidation
partmentalization of malonyl-CoA has been pro-
requires activation of fatty acids by long-chain fatty
posed, but not experimentally verified. Indirect
acid CoA synthetase, followed by formation of acyl-
evidence for malonyl-CoA compartmentalization re-
carnitines by carnitine palmitoyltransferase-I (CPT-
cently has been obtained by demonstrating an equal
I).
12
The reciprocal regulation of carbohydrate and
subcellular distribution of malonyl-CoA de-
fatty acid oxidation is controlled at PDH and CPT-
carboxylase, representing the main route of ma-
I, enzymes that catalyze the committed steps for
lonyl-CoA disposal, in mitochondrial and
the oxidation of pyruvate and fatty acids, re-
extramitochondrial compartments in heart (Kerner
spectively (Fig. 5).
and Hoppel, unpublished data). Third, changes in
The activity of PDH is regulated by phos-
the flux of fatty acid oxidation do not always result
phorylation of the afii9825-subunit of E1 of PDH by PDH
in appropriate directional changes in tissue ma-
kinase, inactivating PDH. Dephosphorylation by
lonyl-CoA concentrations, suggesting the presence
PDH phosphatase activates PDH.
17
In heart, PDH
of additional regulatory mechanisms. Cytoskeletal
kinase isoform 4 predominates, and is rapidly in-
proteins in liver interact with mitochondria and
duced by starvation and diabetes, leading to de-
modulate CPT-I activity.
25
Palmitoyl-CoA, the sub-
creased PDH activity. Isoform 4 is relatively
strate for CPT-I, also competes with malonyl-CoA
insensitive to suppression by dichloroacetate and
for binding at the regulatory site. Thus, increasing
pyruvate.
18
Fatty acids may directly decrease PDH
tissue concentrations of palmitoyl-CoA should
activity via activation of peroxisome proliferator-
dampen CPT-I inhibition at any given malonyl-CoA
activated receptor-afii9825, leading to increased isoform
concentration, leading to an increased flux through
4 expression in skeletal muscle.
19
Whether this also
fatty acid oxidation as the ratio of palmitoyl-CoA:
is the case in heart is not known.
malonyl-CoA increases. Experimental support for
PDH kinase activity is directly inhibited by py-
this regulatory mechanism recently has been pre-
ruvate, leading to increased PDH activity. High
sented.
15
An increased palmitoyl-CoA:malonyl-CoA
rates of fatty acid oxidation inhibit PDH via elevated
ratio due to increased uptake and activation of fatty
mitochondrial contents of acetyl-CoA and NADH,
acids and decreased malonyl-CoA content could
which activate PDH kinase. In addition, end prod-
also explain the high rates of fatty acid oxidation
15
ucts of fatty acid oxidation also have a direct in-
observed during reperfusion.
26
hibitory effect on PDH.
20
The activity of PDH
phosphatase is increased by Ca
2+
and Mg
2+
, leading
to increased PDH activity.
21
Oxidative mitochondrial metabolism
Increased oxidation of pyruvate from carbo-
hydrates inhibits fatty acid oxidation by increasing The matrix space contains the enzymes of the
the content of malonyl-CoA, leading to inhibition tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle, biosynthetic en-
of CPT-I. The molecular basis of inhibition is the zymes, and antioxidant defense enzymes. TCA cycle
oxidation of acetyl-CoA generates NADH andextreme sensitivity of the muscle isoform of CPT-I,
E. J. Lesnefsky et al.1068
Figure 5 CPT-I, the first enzyme of the mitochondrial carnitine system, is localized in the outer membrane with the
malonyl-CoA binding site exposed to the cytosol. Intramitochondrial acetyl-CoA must be converted to cytosolic malonyl-
CoA to inhibit fatty acid oxidation. Increased pyruvate decarboxylation leads to increased mitochondrial acetyl-CoA
G
and to incresead citrate formation. Citrate is transported into the cytosol and reconverted by citrate lyase to acetyl-
CoA, which is carboxylated to malonyl-CoA by acetyl-CoA carboxylase. (An alternative mechanism of mitochondrial
acetyl-CoA export, not depicted here, is via acetylcarnitine and carnitine–acylcarnitine translocase as described in the
text.) Conversely, increased fatty acid oxidation leads to an increased acetyl-CoA (acetyl-CoA
F
) and NADH formation.
Activation of PDH-kinase and direct inhibition of PDH
a
leads to the decrease in mitochondrial pyruvate oxidation.
FADH
2
for oxidation by the ETC (Fig. 6). The ETC ions from the matrix side to the cytosolic side of
the inner membrane stores energy released duringconsists of four multi-subunit enzyme complexes,
and the mobile electron carriers, coenzyme Q (inner electron transport. The inner membrane contains
transporters that regulate the uptake of smallmembrane) and cytochrome c (intermembrane
space), that pass electrons sequentially from high molecules and ions into the matrix.
The phosphorylation apparatus consists of the(NADH or FADH
2
) to low (molecular oxygen) redox
potential (Fig. 6). The multi-subunit complexes of complex V inner membrane ATPase, phosphate
transporter, and adenine nucleotide translocase.
33
the ETC diffuse individually in the semi-fluid inner
membrane cristae. Electron transfer occurs via pro- Inorganic phosphate and ADP are translocated
across the inner mitochondrial membrane. Complexductive collisions.
2
Recently, the organization of
complexes into a larger supercomplex, a res- V provides a path for protons to flow down the
electrochemical gradient from cytosol to the matrixpirasome, has been proposed.
27
The subunit com-
position, 3-dimensional structure, and structure– side of the inner membrane, harnessing the energy
to phosphorylate ADP.
34
Mitochondrial oxidation isfunction relationships of the ETC complexes [com-
plex I,
28
complex II,
29
complex III,
30
and complex coupled in part to myocyte energy demand through
this process. A decreased availability of ADP slowsIV (cytochrome oxidase)
31
] have been extensively
studied and reviewed. the rate of phosphorylation (state 4 respiration),
leads to an enhanced electrochemical proton po-The inner membrane is impermeable to ions and
small molecules as predicted by the chemiosmotic tential across the inner membrane, and slows the
rate of electron transport to oxygen. An increase intheory of Mitchell.
32
Active transport of hydrogen
Mitochondria in Cardiac Disease 1069
Figure 6. The entry of reducing equivalents from NADH, succinate, durohydroquinone (DHQ), and TMPD-ascorbate
(TMPD-asc) into the electron transport chain is shown. Glutamate generates NADH via glutamate dehydrogenase that
is oxidized by complex I with electron flow via coenzyme Q (Q), complex III, cytochrome c, and cytochrome oxidase
(complex IV). Succinate is oxidized by complex II. DHQ is oxidized by complex III. TMPD-ascorbate reduces cytochrome
c that is oxidized by complex IV. Complex III contains cytochromes b and c
1
. Complex IV contains cytochrome aa
3
.
Rotenone and amytal inhibit complex I, myxothiazole and antimycin A inhibit complex III, and azide and potassium
cyanide (KCN) inhibit complex IV.
ADP content secondary to increased energy demand provide insight into the likely sources of increased
oxyradical production in pathologic states. Thewill increase phosphorylation and utilization of the
NADH dehydrogenase in complex I and the ubiqui-proton gradient by complex V, stimulating electron
none–cytochrome b area of complex III generatetransport and oxygen consumption (state 3 res-
•O
2
−
during normal respiration.
39–42
In contrast, al-piration).
though complex IV contains intermediates cor-Uncoupling of the rate of respiration from ADP
responding to the three oxyradicals:•O
2
−
, hydrogenavailability occurs due to physiologic control and
peroxide (H
2
O
2
), and the reactive hydroxyl radicalin pathologic states. Complex IV permits continued
(•OH), these intermediates are tightly bound andelectron transfer in the absence of proton trans-
chemically ‘‘disguised’’, preventing production of re-location.
35
Continued electron transfer prevents the
active oxygen species by complex IV.
43
Conditionsaccumulation of electrons on upstream redox cen-
that support the accumulation of electrons at redoxters, and decreases the formation of reactive oxygen
centers susceptible to electron leak enhance the pro-species.
35,36
Uncoupled respiration occurs in ther-
duction of oxyradicals.
39,41,42,44,45
An increased re-mogenesis due to the action of uncoupling protein.
37
duction of the ETC favoring electron leak occursUncoupling in pathologic states can occur as a
during state 4 respiration
44,45
and ischemia
46,47
whenresult of inappropriate activation or induction of
contents of NADH and FADH
2
are increased and stim-uncoupling proteins
38
or damage to either the in-
ulants of electron transport, ADP and/or O
2
, are de-tegrity of the inner membrane or of complex V.
creased. Based on the localization of the sites of theDamage to complex V or the inner membrane
production of oxyradicals within complex I, •O
2
−
allows back diffusion of protons, dissipates the elec-
formation should occur on the matrix side of the
trochemical gradient ‘‘de-energizing’’ mitochondria,
inner membrane. Complex III can release ox-
and blunts phosphorylation.
yradicals to either the matrix
41,42
or intermembrane
space
48
compartments. The continuous ‘‘low level’’
oxyradical generation during normal respiration in-
Production of reactive oxygen species by mitochondria creases the oxidation of mitochondrial proteins,
49
lip-
and mitochondrial antioxidant defense ids,
50
and DNA.
51
More extensive oxidative damage
is prevented by mitochondrial antioxidant enzyme
During normal respiration, approximately 2–4% of systems.
52–57
electron flow through the ETC results in only partial Manganese-containing mitochondrial superoxide
reduction of O
2
, generating superoxide (•O
2
−
).
39,40
dismutase, located in the matrix, eliminates •O
2
−
by catalyzing dismutation to H
2
O
2
.H
2
O
2
is in-The sites of ‘‘electron leak’’ during normal respiration
E. J. Lesnefsky et al.1070
activated by either catalase
52
or by the glutathione seems unlikely that 80% of the mitochondria in any
cardiac myocyte would sustain the same stochasticredox system consisting of reduced glutathione as
the cofactor for glutathione peroxidase and glu- somatic mutation and induce a phenotype, several
factors make the occurrence more likely. First,tathione reductase.
53–55
The relative contributions
of catalase
52
and glutathione peroxidase
53
in H
2
O
2
mtDNA mutations appear to segregate, leading to
a ‘‘mosaic’’ pattern of myocyte involvement.
65
Thus,degradation in cardiac mitochondria remain un-
clear. These enzymes serve to minimize the ac- rather than each myocyte consisting of 20% im-
paired mitochondria, 20% of the cells may havecumulation of•O
2
−
and H
2
O
2
, which in the presence
of the redox-active transition metals, copper and nearly 100% of mitochondria affected. Mosaic pat-
terns of loss of complex IV occur in the aging heart.
68
iron, form the very reactive and damaging •OH,
for which no antioxidant enzyme system exists.
55
Second, mitochondria containing mutations can
segregate along the length of the myocyte.
66
Ad-Enzyme systems also exist in mitochondria that
repair oxidative damage. Phospholipid hydro- ditionally, while currently not well understood, cer-
tain mutations, such as the ‘‘large deletion’’, appearperoxide glutathione peroxidase is a selenium-con-
taining enzyme that directly reduces peroxidized to occur more frequently than other deletions, sug-
gesting that deletion occurrence may not be aacyl-groups in phospholipids.
56
Repair of oxidized
protein sulfhydryl groups occurs via thioredoxin completely stochastic process.
63,64
Finally, while
‘‘loss of function’’ may require a substantial numberand thioltransferase enzymes.
58,59
Phospholipid
hydroperoxide glutathione peroxidase has both cy- of affected mitochondria, acquisition of pathologic
function, including cell damage secondary to en-tosolic and mitochondrial isoforms.
56
hanced production of oxyradicals or release of cyto-
chrome c, may require far fewer affected
mitochondria per myocyte.Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA)
mtDNA consists of circular double-stranded DNA
located in the matrix in close proximity to the Mitochondrial proteins
inner membrane.
60
Propinquity to the sites of the
generation of reactive oxygen species suggests that Mitochondria contain both nuclear-encoded pro-
teins and proteins encoded by mtDNA. mtDNAmtDNA is highly susceptible to oxidative damage.
51
Oxidative modification of bases in mtDNA is ob- encodes for specific subunits of the ETC complexes,
most of which are catalytic subunits directly in-served more frequently than in nuclear DNA.
51,60
Recent work has shown that mitochondria contain volved in the transfer of electrons. mtDNA encodes
for 13 proteins, including seven subunits of the 42DNA repair enzymes, including those for base ex-
cision repair.
62,63
The susceptibility orf mtDNA to subunit complex I, cytochrome b of the 11 subunit
complex III, and subunits I, II, III of 13 subunitoxidative damage is probably less than previously
thought. complex IV.
60
The mitochondrial genome is tran-
scribed in an ‘‘all or none’’ fashion without tran-Nearly all of the mitochondria in the zygote
are derived from the oocyte.
68
Thus, mitochondrial scriptional regulation of individual genes.
The majority of mitochondrial proteins are en-cytopathies secondary to mtDNA mutations display
a maternal inheritance.
60
mtDNA also is subject coded by the nuclear genome, synthesized on cy-
tosolic ribosomes, and imported into mitochondria.to somatic mutations during the life of the cell,
important in the post-mitotic cardiac myocyte.
60,62
Mitochondrial protein import is highly regulated,
with import mechanisms consisting of protein chap-The frequency of mutations in mtDNA in cardiac
myocytes increases with age in both experimental erones
69,70
and transmembrane peptide import sys-
tems. The transmembrane peptide importanimals and humans.
62,63
A frequently observed
mutation is a deletion of 4977 bp.
60,63,64
Disease complexes translocate proteins into the appropriate
mitochondrial space (translocase outer mem-states, including chronic myocardial ischemia, in-
crease the frequency of mutations in mtDNA.
64
brane—TOM,
69
translocase inner membrane—
TIM
70
) based upon specific mitochondrial targetingHowever, the link between a genotype of mtDNA
mutation and a phenotype of cellular dysfunction sequences in amino terminal portion of the pre-
protein that are cleaved following import.
69
Dir-has proved more elusive in the case of acquired
mutations. Due to heteroplasmy (many copies of ection of proteins to specific mitochondrial
compartments contributes to the regulation of mito-mtDNA per cell), approximately 80% of mito-
chondria must be affected in order to result in chondrial metabolism.
Cytochrome c is synthesized as a nuclear-encodedloss of mitochondrial function.
65–67
While it initially
Mitochondria in Cardiac Disease 1071
apoprotein with a mitochondrial targeting metabolic efficiency.
74
Contractile recovery and the
extent of tissue injury during post-ischemic re-sequence.
71
During import into mitochondria, the
intermembrane space enzyme, ferrochelatase, in- perfusion varies as a function of the substrate fur-
nished to the heart,
75–78
providing insight into theserts the iron into apocytochrome c. Addition of
iron is required for successful import into the in- contributions of altered mitochondrial metabolism
to physiology of the intact heart.termembrane space.
71
The presequence is then
cleaved, generating functional cytochrome c.
The role of mitochondrial–nuclear genomic inter-
actions in the proper assembly of ETC complexes, Isolated myocytes
composed of both nuclear and mtDNA-encoded
subunits, remains unknown. Subunits present in Intact, isolated myocytes provide an approach to
study in situ mitochondrial function, includinggreater excess than required for assembly of ETC
complexes are degraded by matrix proteases.
72
It is membrane potential,
79
calcium content,
80
and pro-
duction of reactive oxygen species.
47
In situ studiescurrently unclear if ETC complexes, or their dam-
aged subunits, can be replaced in existing mito- require the use of fluorescent dyes as indicators of
mitochondrial function, usually assessed by con-chondria, or if assembly of electron transport chain
complexes occurs only during mitochondrial pro- focal laser microscopy. The major strength of this
approach is the ability to study mitochondria inliferation. The signals for replacement of defective
subunits or complexes, or even the question if situ. Studies using fluorescent dyes as endpoints are
limited by the specificity of the particular dye andmtDNA transcription can drive synthesis of nuclear-
encoded subunits required to complete assembly of by issues regarding fluorescence quenching, and
linearity of response.
81,82
Care must be taken tothe ETC complexes remain unknown. If tran-
scription of nuclear-encoded proteins does respond achieve proper dye concentrations so that mito-
chondrial, and not plasma membrane, potentialto defects in ETC complexes, this response can
provide a sensitive index for the loss of mito- is observed.
81,82
With attention to these concerns,
studies utilizing intact myocytes have provided im-chondrial function at the cellular level. These issues
have an impact upon the potential for restoration portant insight into mitochondrial function in pa-
thologic states.of mitochondrial function in pathologic states. It has
been reported recently that heart failure increases Permeabilized myofibers or myocytes are used to
study substrate oxidation by in situ mitochondria.transcription of adenine nucleotide translocator-
1 and subunits of complex V,
73
suggesting that The plasma membrane is permeabilized with digit-
onin or saponin to allow equilibration of cytosoltranscription of nuclear-encoded mitochondrial pro-
teins are regulated in response to changing con- and media. Substrates are added and oxygen con-
sumption measured. With this approach, the inter-ditions in the myocyte.
action of in situ mitochondria with cytoskeletal
components can be studied, whereas interactions
with the cytosol are lost. Due to the presence of non-
Experimental Approaches to Study
mitochondrial ATPases, oxidative phosphorylation
Mitochondrial Metabolism
and coupling of respiration to energy demand can-
not be studied in detail.
Experimental preparations ranging from the intact
heart to structural and functional characterization
of individual molecular components of mito-
Isolated mitochondria
chondria are studied. The different experimental
systems each have strengths and weaknesses, and
Using isolated mitochondria (Fig. 7), oxidative
provide complementary strategies to elucidate the
metabolism can be studied in detail, including the
role of mitochondria in cardiac disease.
coupling of oxidation and phosphorylation. Titra-
tion of activity with inhibitors of respiration is
used to study the control strength of the different
components on the overall rate of oxidative phos-Isolated perfused heart
phorylation.
83–85
Cardiac mitochondria exist in two functionallyThe isolated, perfused heart is used to study the
impact of substrate selection on resting cardiac distinct populations, subsarcolemmal mitochondria
(SSM) residing beneath the plasma membrane, andfunction. Measured oxygen consumption compared
with mechanical work yields estimates of cardiac interfibrillar mitochondria (IFM) located between
E. J. Lesnefsky et al.1072
study of processes localized to the inner membrane
or to the matrix in a preparation with retained
respiration and respiratory coupling.
5,94,95
Mitoplast
preparation releases contents of the intermembrane
space for isolation and study. Sonication of intact
mitochondria followed by sedimentation of the re-
sulting ‘‘inside-out’’ inner membrane vesicles yields
submitochondrial particles (SMP).
96
SMP are devoid
of matrix contents and lack respiratory control.
SMP are useful for studies that require an increased
concentration of ETC complexes, including EPR.
97
The lack of antioxidant enzymes makes SMP at-
tractive for the study of the generation of reactive
oxygen species from specific sites in the ETC.
Integrative approach to the study of mitochondrial
pathophysiology
The polarographic study of oxidative phos-
phorylation in isolated mitochondria provides an
approach to localize defects in the ETC and to
identify damage to the phosphorylation apparatus
that results in diminished coupling of respiration.
Figure 7 Survey micrograph of a pellet of mitochondria Substrates that donate electrons to specific sites in
isolated from the rat heart. Note purity of the sample.
the ETC are used to localize the sites of defects (Fig.
×4400.
6). Measurement of uncoupled respiration evaluates
whether or not damage to the phosphorylation
apparatus is the mechanism of decreased oxidative
the myofibrils (Fig. 8).
86–93
ADP-stimulated res-
phosphorylation. Exposure of mitochondria to freez-
piratory rates (state 3) are greater in IFM than in
ing–thawing and hypotonic conditions per-
SSM, whereas the coupling of respiration is similar
meabilizes the inner membrane, removing transport
in both populations.
88,89
IFM have an increased
barriers. Measurement of oxygen consumption in
content of respiratory cytochromes, and the activity
permeabilized mitochondria bypasses defects in sub-
of ETC complexes is greater in IFM than in SSM.
88,89
strate carriers or dehydrogenases and confirms
Differences in respiratory rates and enzyme contents
localization of defects to the ETC. Measurement of
persist following exposure of each population to the
enzyme activities of the specific ETC complexes in
methods used to isolate the other population.
89
A
solubilized mitochondria directly localizes defects in
distinct structural marker for each population has
the ETC predicted from the study of intact and
not been identified. However, the two populations
permeabilized mitochondria.
are affected differently in pathologic states, in-
cluding calcium overload,
90
cardiomyopathy,
91
aging,
92
and ischemia.
87,88,93
Thus, consideration of
regional differences in mitochondrial response to Mechanisms of Mitochondrial-derived
disease states is required in order to identify novel
Tissue Injury
mitochondrial defects present in pathophysiologic
states. Mitochondria contribute to myocyte injury via loss
of physiologic function or acquisition of pathologic
function. The physiologic significance of damage to
mitochondrial DNA, proteins, or lipids should beMitochondrial components
established at the level of the mitochondrion, myo-
cyte, and whole heart. Since many mitochondrialMitoplasts are obtained from isolated mitochondria
following removal of the outer mitochondrial mem- enzyme systems are present in excess relative to
the amount required to support maximal rates ofbrane by digitonin, French press, or osmotic swell-
ing and shrinking. Mitoplasts are useful for the oxidative phosphorylation in intact mitochondria,
Mitochondria in Cardiac Disease 1073
Figure 8 Cardiac mitochondria exist in two functionally distinct populations. Subsarcolemmal mitochondria are
situated beneath the plasma membrane (sarcolemma), while interfibrillar mitochondria are ensconced among the
myofibrils. Transverse section of a cardiomyocyte in the hamster heart showing a cluster of subsarcolemmal mitochondria
at the top of the micrograph and a cluster of interfibrillar mitochondria at the lower left corner. Other interfibrillar
mitochondria are scattered among the myofibrils. ×7200.
the physiologic significance of loss of mitochondrial function should have an impact on cell physiology
via the deleterious accumulation of substrates or theenzyme activity needs to be established. Loss of
function secondary to molecular damage is es- impairment of energy-dependent cellular processes.
The loss of mitochondrial function present at thetablished at the mitochondrial level by the per-
sistence of defects in mitochondrial oxidative cellular level should translate to loss of physiologic
function or to enhanced tissue injury in the intactphysiology under non-maximal, as well as maximal
rate conditions. While the use of maximally ex- heart.
Loss of mitochondrial function may be com-pressed activity is useful to establish the presence
of enzyme defects, mitochondrial respiration in situ pensated for at a cellular or organ level, thus re-
quiring a comprehensive approach to study theoperates at non-maximal rates.
83–85
Significant de-
fects should also exhibit a greater sensitivity to impact of mitochondrial defects. It remains un-
certain if all mitochondria are impaired to a similarinhibitor titration,
98
providing evidence for new sites
of control of mitochondrial oxidative metabolism extent, or if a fraction of mitochondria is severely
affected. In the latter case, mitochondria with pre-secondary to newly acquired partial blocks in ox-
idative metabolism. Loss of function also is expected served function may compensate for affected mito-
chondria. Mitochondria also may be affected on ato result in the accumulation of substrates that are
ordinarily oxidized. Significant loss of mitochondrial cell by cell basis, rather than all cells containing a
E. J. Lesnefsky et al.1074
similar fraction of affected mitochondria. Thus, membrane dissipates the proton gradient, de-en-
ergizing mitochondria and blocking phos-while mosaic patterns of involvement dramatically
impair metabolism in severely affected cells, perhaps phorylation. Last, damage to mitochondrial creatine
kinase, an oxidatively sensitive enzyme,
100
impairseven leading to cell death, other myocytes with
unimpaired mitochondrial function may com- the creatine shuttle, blunting export of high energy
phosphates from mitochondria. Thus, damage topensate for severely affected cells, preserving cardiac
function. Development of a disease phenotype thus mitochondria at any one of several sites can impair
energy production.requires progression until the number of involved
myocytes is sufficient to alter cardiac physiology.
The acquisition of pathologic mitochondrial func-
Accumulation of metabolic intermediatestion occurs secondary to the production of com-
pounds not present during normal metabolism; an
Loss of mitochondrial function also may result in the
increase in the content of a deleterious compound
accumulation of compounds toxic to the myocyte.
present at a low concentration during normal meta-
Decreased oxidation of pyruvate leads to lactate
bolism; or release of a constituent normally se-
production and acidosis observed in ischemia and
questered in mitochondria. In contrast to loss of
mitochondrial myopathies. Impaired oxidation of
function, gain of pathologic function is likely to
lipid substrates results in accumulation of long-
require fewer mitochondria to produce deleterious
chain acyl-CoA and acylcarnitines.
101–104
These
consequences for the myocyte. Functional or ana-
compounds inhibit PDH, block carbohydrate ox-
tomic subpopulations of cardiac mitochondria thus
idation,
103
accumulate in myocyte membranes,
101
can exert harmful effects upon the myocyte. The
enhance myocyte calcium loading,
104
and lead to
physiologic relevance of injurious mitochondrial
arrhythmias by direct detergent action and by ac-
effectors should be demonstrated by the use of
tivating calcium channels.
101
interventions, either metabolic or pharmacologic,
that negate production of the deleterious metabolite
and allay cell and organ dysfunction and tissue
injury. Acquisition of pathologic mitochondrial function
Production of reactive oxygen species
Damage to mitochondria enhances the production
Loss of mitochondrial function of reactive oxygen species.
100
Two mechanisms com-
bine to increase oxyradical production. First, de-
Decrease in production of high energy phosphates creased flux through the ETC increases the
reduction of proximal sites in the ETC, enhancing
Damage to cardiac mitochondria impairs energy
‘‘electron leak’’ that forms •O
2
−
.
44,45
Second, dam-
production by several mechanisms. First, direct
age to individual ETC complexes directly results in
damage to the ETC leads to decreased rates of
electron leak and oxyradical production. Damage
substrate oxidation.
87,93,99
Enzyme activities of ETC
to complex I directly increases the production of
complexes are present in excess relative to oxidative
oxyradicals.
106–108
Ischemic damage to complex III
phosphorylation, so decreases in ETC enzyme ac-
superimposed upon preexisting aging defects may
tivities of 30–50% are needed to lower the rate of
enhance the production of oxyradicals in the aging
oxidative phosphorylation.
83–85
In the baseline state,
heart.
109
the sites of greatest control of oxidative phos-
phorylation are present in complex I, the adenine
nucleotide translocase, and complex V.
83–85
These
Release of cytochrome c
sites require the least inhibition for decreases in
the rate of oxidative phosphorylation to become Release of cytochrome c from mitochondria is a
key step leading to programmed cell death.
110–112
apparent. Damage to specific sites in the ETC in-
troduces additional sites of partial block in electron Although apoptosis can occur in the absence of
cytochrome c release, cytochrome c directly activatestransport, generating new sites of control of ox-
idative phosphorylation. downstream effectors when injected into the cytosol
in the absence of upstream signals.
113
Following re-Damage to the phosphorylation apparatus also
impairs energy production. Direct damage to com- lease of cytochrome c, a complex is formed in the
cytosol in the presence of APAF-1, deoxyATP, andplex V decreases the rate of efficiency (coupling) of
phosphorylation of ADP.
99
Damage to the inner the cysteine protease caspase-9. This complex then
Mitochondria in Cardiac Disease 1075
directly activates downstream effectors of the apop-
totic pathway including caspase-3.
Regulation of cytochrome c release by mito-
chondria currently is being investigated. Release
may occur secondary to the onset of mitochondrial
permeability transition (MPT).
113
MPT occurs sec-
ondary to formation of an inner membrane pore
permeable to solutes of less than 1200 Da.
113,114
The onset of MPT leads to loss of mitochondrial
membrane potential and to swelling of the matrix
space with eventual disruption of mitochondrial
membranes and release of cytochrome c.
110,113
This
catastrophic event is caused by oxidative damage Figure 9 Subsarcolemmal mitochondria (SSM) have a
decreased capacity to accumulate calcium compared to
to mitochondria in concert with mitochondrial cal-
IFM. SSM release cytochrome c in response to calcium
cium overload, conditions frequently observed dur-
accumulation while IFM do not (the data are redrawn
ing ischemia and reperfusion. The ‘‘pore’’ of MPT
from American Journal of Physiology 1986; 250: H741–
contains porin and adenine nucleotide translocase,
H748).
both components of contact sites, and might rep-
resent pathologic alteration of a contact site. Under
ischemic conditions, there is a transition from the
instead of to energy production.
124
Mitochondrial
octameric to the dimeric form of creatine kinase.
115
calcium loading predisposes to MPT.
113,114
SSM have
The dimeric form of creatine kinase, porin, and
a decreased capacity for calcium accumulation (Fig.
adenine nucleotide translocase exhibit some prop-
9).
90
Furthermore, calcium loading in SSM led to the
erties of the MPT pore when incorporated into
release of cytochrome c whereas calcium loading in
membrane systems.
116,117
IFM did not result in cytochrome c release, even
However, cytochrome c release is highly regu-
when the capacity of IFM to retain calcium was
lated, and probably occurs following events other
exceeded.
90
Elevated calcium content in the matrix
than the catastrophic mitochondrial damage ob-
activates proteases and phospholipase A
2
, degrading
served with MPT in experimental studies. First,
proteins and phospholipids.
50
Matrix dense bodies
MPT itself may be a transient and even reversible
visible by electron microscopy are a hallmark of
phenomenon, reflecting a dynamic balance of regu-
irreversible mitochondrial damage secondary to cal-
lators for and against MPT.
118
Independent of MPT,
cium accumulation.
families of proteins located in the mitochondrial
outer membrane, Bax and Bcl-X, exert coun-
tervailing influences on cytochrome c release, fa-
Mitochondria as Sources and Targets of
voring and inhibiting release, respectively.
110
Some
Injury in Specific Cardiac Disease States
proteins important in the apoptotic cascade, such
as APAF-1, may be located in the intermembrane
Ischemia
space.
119
The significance and roles of the proteins,
and the impact of their submitochondrial local-
Ischemia progressively damages mitochondria
ization, remain incompletely understood. A pre-
disposition to myocyte apoptosis might contribute Mitochondrial ultrastructural
125
and functional
126
injury occur early in the course of ischemia, andto the loss of myocytes observed in congestive heart
failure
120
and in the aging heart.
121
progresses during ischemia.
87,126
Ischemic damage
to mitochondrial respiration also progresses as the
duration of ischemia increases (Fig. 10).
87,93,99
Ten to
Mitochondrial calcium accumulation
20 min of ischemia decreases complex I activity.
99,126
Damage to the phosphorylation apparatus, in-Cytosolic calcium content increases during myo-
cardial ischemia and reperfusion
122
leading to cal- cluding complex V
99
and the adenine nucleotide
transporter,
33,127
also occurs early in ischemia. How-cium accumulation by mitochondria via uptake
by the inner membrane calcium uniporter.
123,124
ever, mitochondrial oxidative function and cardiac
contractile function recover following these periodsIncreased matrix calcium content leads to mito-
chondrial calcium release and reuptake, generating of ischemia.
126
As ischemia continues for 30 and
45 min, at the onset of irreversible myocyte damageenergy-consuming futile cycles that divert use of the
inner membrane proton gradient to cation transport a second defect occurs in the ETC distal to complex
E. J. Lesnefsky et al.1076
Figure 10 The progression of ischemic damage to SSM in the isolated perfused heart is shown. Fifteen minutes of
ischemia leads to a complex I defect that is reversible with reperfusion. Complex III activity decreases by 25 min of
ischemia as observed in the isolated perfused rat heart. By 30 min of ischemia, cardiolipin content decreases in SSM
and oxidative phosphorylation through complex IV is decreased. Cardiolipin content and oxidative phosphorylation
through complex IV remain decreased at 45 min ischemia. The onset of the transition from reversible to irreversible
myocyte damage occurs at approximately 30 min of ischemia.
I.
87
Ischemic damage in the distal ETC involves both the control strength of the electron transport chain,
including complex I and complex III.
85
complexes III
110
and IV
87
(Fig. 6). Thus, while a com-
plex I defect occurs early, as ischemia continues dam-
age progresses to involve complexes III and IV.
Molecular targets of ischemic damage to the ETC
ADP-stimulated respiration (state 3) is decreased
during ischemia. Damage to the phosphorylation Complex I is the initial site of ischemic damage
to the ETC. Complex I activity decreases duringapparatus does not explain the decrease in state 3
respiration observed as ischemia progresses since ischemia secondary to a decrease in the NADH
dehydrogenase component of the complex,
99,130
pos-dinitrophenol-uncoupled respiration is also de-
creased, localizing the functionally significant site sibly due to the loss of the flavin mononucleotide
coenzyme.
131
Damage to the NADH dehydrogenaseof damage to the ETC.
87
Complex V catalyzes ATP hydrolysis during isch- component of complex I can increase electron leak
and the production of reactive oxygen species.
39
emia, the reverse reaction of ADP phosphorylation
that occurs during normal oxidative metabolism.
128
Ischemic damage then progresses to involve com-
plexes III and IV in the distal ETC.The enhanced consumption of ATP during ischemia
accelerates the time course of ischemic injury. Car- Ischemia damages complex III by functional in-
activation of the iron–sulfur protein (ISP) subunitdiac myocytes contain a peptide inhibitor that binds
to complex V during ischemia and blocks the hy- in the isolated rat heart.
109
The ISP is a 22 kDa
protein that contains a 2 Fe–2 S redox-active iron–drolysis of ATP.
129
Inhibition of complex V by ATPase
inhibitor protein is cardioprotective during isch- sulfur cluster. Ischemic damage to the ISP results
in loss of the EPR signal of the iron–sulfur clusteremia.
129
Ischemic damage to the ETC is physiologically without loss of the ISP peptide, suggesting that
ischemia results in disruption of the cluster withoutsignificant in terms of both loss of metabolic func-
tion and gain of pathologic alteration. The ischemia- degradation of the ISP subunit.
109
Conserved cyst-
eine and histidine residues are ligands for the Feinduced decrease in the activity of complex IV is
observed under both submaximally and maximally atoms in the cluster.
132
In vitro oxidative damage
to the histidine residues leads to loss of complex IIIexpressed rates of oxidative phosphorylation
through complex IV.
87
Ischemic damage increases activity.
133
In addition to the ligands of the iron
Mitochondria in Cardiac Disease 1077
atoms, the integrity of the cluster requires that content occurs in the setting of preserved integrity
of the inner membrane measured both by functionalthe native conformation of ISP be preserved. An
intramolecular disulfide bond between two highly and morphologic criteria. The inner membrane
retains the capacity to support a proton gradient.
146
conserved cysteine residues remote from the cluster
itself is required to preserve the integrity of the State respiration is not increased.
87
Morphologic
evidence of increased disruption of in situ and isol-cluster.
134
These sites provide likely targets for isch-
emia to disrupt the 2 Fe–2 S cluster without a loss ated populations of mitochondria is not observed
using electron microscopy.
87
Ischemia does increaseof the peptide.
Complex IV is a membrane-associated enzyme the viscosity of the inner membrane,
139,147
possibly
as a consequence of cardiolipin depletion.
139
Losscomplex composed of 13 peptide subunits, including
catalytic, structural, and regulatory subunits.
31
of membrane fluidity decreases the activity of inner
membrane transport systems and potentially of ETCFunctional assays of complex IV systematically ex-
cluded ischemic damage to catalytic, regulatory, complexes as well.
148
and structural subunits, including subunits that
bind cytochrome c.
87
Ischemic damage to a protein
Oxidative damage to mitochondria occurs during
subunit of complex IV is an unlikely mechanism
ischemia
for the ischemic defect in SSM in the rabbit heart.
87
Complex IV requires a lipid environment in the The ETC is a probable source of reactive oxygen
species that damage cardiolipin,
39–41
even duringinner membrane enriched in cardiolipin
135,136
in
addition to the integrity of peptide subunits for ischemia. Inhibitor blockade of the ETC decreases
oxyradical production in isolated cardiac myocytesoptimal activity. Ischemia decreases the content of
cardiolipin in concert with the onset of the complex during simulated ischemia.
47
During ischemia, free
radical generation occurs in myocardial tissue.
46,47
IV defect during the time course of ischemia in the
isolated rabbit heart.
137
While cardiolipin content In the isolated rabbit heart, blockade of the proximal
ETC with rotenone prevents the ischemia-inducedwas decreased, the content of the remaining phos-
pholipids was preserved.
137
The composition of the decrease in cardiolipin content in SSM, consistent
with the notion of oxidative damage to cardiolipinremaining cardiolipin was unaltered.
137
Mito-
chondrial cardiolipin content decreased in both in mediated by the ETC (Lesnefsky and Hoppel, un-
published data).vitro
138,139
and in vivo
140,141
experimental models of
myocardial ischemia. Ischemia also leads to oxidative damage to mito-
chondrial proteins. Ischemia decreases mito-The mitochondrial inner membrane is enriched
in cardiolipin, a phospholipid unique to mito- chondrial protein sulfhydryl (SH) content
148,149
and
increases oxidatively-modified proteins detected bychondria.
142
Cardiolipin is a diphosphatidylglycerol
with two diacylglycerol residues.
142
Cardiolipin per the carbonyl assay.
150
The mitochondrial ratio of
reduced:oxidized glutathione decreases during isch-se is highly enriched in oxidatively-sensitive acyl-
groups, containing 90–95% linoleic acid (C18: emia, confirming a shift in redox state toward
increased SH-oxidation.
151
Oxidative protein mo-2).
137,143
The two double bonds in C18:2 can
rearrange to a resonance-stabilized, conjugated difications accelerate degradation by proteases,
which are activated by ischemia.
153
Thus, duringdiene following free radical-mediated abstraction
of an allylic hydrogen.
144
C18:2 readily participates ischemia there is both functional and chemical
evidence of oxidative damage.in free radical-initiated reactions in the membrane,
with the formation of lipid peroxides. While Ischemia decreases mitochondrial antioxidant de-
fense, further enhancing the likelihood of oxidativeoxidatively altered acyl-groups were not detected
in cardiolipin from mitochondria from ischemic damage. MnSOD activity decreases while cytosolic
SOD activity remains unchanged.
152
Ischemia de-hearts, lipid peroxy-groups are unstable and may
not be available for detection. Decomposition of creased mitochondrial glutathione peroxidase ac-
tivity, a major source of the detoxification of H
2
O
2
.
152
lipid peroxides in cardiolipin can lead to the
direct destruction of cardiolipin
144
or to covalent
phospholipid–protein complexes that render the
Ischemia and release of cytochrome c
phospholipid no longer detectable as a phos-
pholipid.
146
Ischemia predisposes mitochondria to release cyto-
chrome c from the intermembrane space.
153
Cyto-Ischemic damage to cardiolipin is selective be-
cause the contents of other mitochondrial phos- chrome c is detected in the cytosol at 30 min of
ischemia in the rabbit heart.
153
The content of cyto-pholipids remain unaltered during ischemia in the
isolated rabbit heart.
137
The decrease in cardiolipin chrome c decreases in SSM at 30 min of ischemia,
E. J. Lesnefsky et al.1078
concomitant with cardiolipin loss in SSM.
87,137
The initial step in the progression of ischemic mito-
chondrial damage.
87
SSM produce reactive oxygenproduction of oxidants, de-energization secondary to
cessation of electron transport, calcium ac- species following ischemic damage, while oxy-
radicals production by IFM is not enhanced.
147
Thecumulation, and sulfhydryl oxidation all increase the
likelihood of MPT, with subsequent release of cyto- increased damage may occur secondarily either to
their location in the subsarcolemmal compartmentchrome c. Loss of cardiolipin during ischemia may
also cause loss of cytochrome c from the inner mem- of the myocyte, or due to a greater intrinsic sus-
ceptibility to damage during ischemia. Even in thebrane, delocalizing cytochrome c from the inner
membrane space. Cytochrome c is highly positively baseline state, SSM display an increased sensitivity
to calcium-mediated damage compared to IFM,
90
charged at physiologic pH (pI 10.3) due to the pres-
ence of multiple lysine residues.
154
Cardiolipin con- raising the possibility that SSM inherently are more
sensitive to ischemic damage than are IFM. Thetains negatively-charged phosphatidic acid head
groups (pK
a
4.8)
142
that bind cytochrome c.
155,156
selectivity of ischemic damage to SSM provides a
mechanism whereby damage to a subset of mito-Ischemia-induced loss of cardiolipin thus may pre-
dispose to cytochrome c release. chondria leads to myocyte death.
Mitochondrial calcium overload contributes to myocyte
Reperfusion
damage
Reperfusion damage to the ETC
Ischemia leads to mitochondrial calcium loading.
122
Since mitochondrial calcium uptake during isch-
Recovery of mitochondrial function during re-
emia occurs via the uniporter,
123
blockade of the
perfusion depends in part on the duration of the
uniporter with ruthenium red can determine if
preceding ischemia. Following brief periods of isch-
mitochondrial calcium uptake during ischemia
emia, decreased rates of glutamate oxidation im-
leads to cardiac injury. Treatment of isolated hearts
prove during reperfusion.
126
In contrast, following
with ruthenium red reduced mitochondrial calcium
the onset of ischemic damage to complexes III and
uptake and ischemic myocardial injury.
123
If cal-
IV, the rate of oxidative phosphorylation further
cium-mediated injury is based upon the activation
deteriorates during reperfusion,
157
suggesting that
of PLA
2
, a generalized decrease in mitochondrial
additional mitochondrial injury occurs.
phospholipid content with a corresponding increase
The activities of ETC complexes I
126
and III
157
in lysophospholipids would be expected.
50
This find-
decrease during reperfusion. The sites of damage
ing was not observed during ischemia.
137
Total
to these complexes during reperfusion is un-
mitochondrial phospholipid content did not de-
known. Although complex IV activity is decreased
crease in SSM following 45 min of ischemia in the
by ischemia and reperfusion,
139
damage during
rabbit heart,
137
60 min of global ischemia in the rat
ischemia dominates, since the rate of oxidative
heart,
138
nor 120 min of regional ischemia in the
phosphorylation through complex IV in intact
pig heart.
141
Thus, generalized PLA
2
activation ap-
mitochondria does not further deteriorate during
pears to be an unlikely mechanism for calcium-
reperfusion (Lesnefsky and Hoppel, unpublished
mediated mitochondrial damage during cardiac
data). Consistent with cardiolipin loss as the mech-
ischemia.
anism of the complex IV defect in SSM, cardiolipin
content in SSM does not further deteriorate during
early reperfusion in the isolated heart in vitro
Ischemic damage is greater in SSM than in IFM
(Lesnefsky and Hoppel, unpublished data) or dur-
ing reperfusion following regional ischemia in
SSM sustain a more rapid onset of ischemic damage
vivo.
140
than do IFM in multiple experimental models.
33,87,
88,93,140,147
An increased susceptibility of SSM to
ischemic damage has been observed in isolated rat
Mitochondria mediate oxidative damage during
and rabbit hearts in vitro
33,87
and during regional
reperfusion
ischemia in vivo.
140
In the isolated, perfused rabbit
heart, at 30 and 45 min of ischemia, SSM exhibit Ischemic damage to the ETC leads to increased
•O
2
−
and H
2
O
2
generation during reperfusion.
105,
decreased oxidative phosphorylation through com-
plex IV and the distal ETC
87
and loss of cardiolipin
137 158–161
The oxidation of either glutamate or succinate
increases •O
2
−
generation during reperfusion. Dur-and cytochrome c
87
content. In contrast, IFM only
display decreases in the oxidation of glutamate, the ing reperfusion, mitochondria generate reactive
Mitochondria in Cardiac Disease 1079
oxygen species
105,146,159,160
that lead to additional IV is under respiratory control or independent
of respiratory control (‘‘uncoupled’’).
35
Uncoupledmitochondrial
105,158,161
and myocyte injury.
158,159,161
Post-ischemic mitochondria generate the reactive electron flow through complex IV decreases the
relative reduction of complexes I and III,
35,36
de-and damaging hydroxyl radical (•OH).
105,160
In the
isolated perfused heart, reperfusion following creasing the likelihood of electron leak by these
complexes to form oxyradicals. Ischemia-induced30 min of ischemia increases oxyradical generation
measured by ESR spin-trapping technique.
158
In- decreases in complex IV activity predispose to
oxidant production by removing an antioxidantcreased mitochondrial •OH generation also has
been detected by the salicylate hydroxylation tech- mechanism in the ETC.
nique.
160
A critical amount of damage to the ETC
by ischemia is required for the generation of reactive
oxygen species. Normal cardiac mitochondria gen- Dysregulation of substrate oxidation during reperfusion
erate little •OH, while intermediate degrees of dam-
Damage due to ischemia or reperfusion disrupts the
age markedly accentuate •OH production.
tight regulation of substrate selection for mito-
However, severe injury resulting in markedly re-
chondrial oxidation, having a negative impact on
duced oxygen consumption greatly decreases •OH
cardiac metabolic and mechanical function during
formation.
105
reperfusion.
75,76
Cardiac recovery is enhanced by
Reperfusion-induced declines in cardiac function
the oxidation of carbohydrates, rather than of fatty
and accumulation of oxidatively damaged lipids are
acids, during early reperfusion.
75,76
Reperfusion
diminished when mitochondrial respiration was
leads to an increase in uncoupled respiration that
reversibly inhibited during early reperfusion using
is observed in isolated mitochondria.
75–77
The in-
amytal,
158
underlining the physiologic significance
crease in uncoupled respiration is manifested as an
of mitochondrial oxyradical production. In contrast,
excess oxidation of substrates compared to energy
inhibition of complex IV with CN
−
does not confer
production during reperfusion, decreasing the
protection.
158
Amytal treatment helps to dissect the
metabolic efficiency of the reperfused heart. The
relative contributions of complexes I and III in
uncoupling of substrate oxidation from energy de-
the genesis of oxidative damage.
162
Amytal blocks
mand is enhanced with lipid substrates compared
complex I near the binding site for ubiquinol, the
to carbohydrate substrates.
166
Reperfusion leads to
electron acceptor from complex I.
162
Block of com-
the loss of regulation of fatty acid oxidation by CPT-
plex I at this distal site in electron flow through
I, probably secondarily to a decrease in content
the complex enhances reduction of the NADH de-
of malonyl-CoA.
168
The content of malonyl-CoA
hydrogenase in complex I, increasing electron leak
decreases during ischemia and further decreases
from complex I to form reactive oxygen species.
39
during reperfusion.
168
As a consequence of in-
Thus, rotenone blockade should enhance, not de-
creased supply of non-esterified fatty acids present
crease, oxyradical production by complex I. There-
in the intact organism during ischemia, the control
fore, the observed decrease in the production of
strength at CPT-I is further attenuated due to the
oxyradicals and improved myocardial protection in
increased cytosolic content of long-chain acyl-CoAs.
the presence of amytal strongly suggest that the
Whether the acyl-CoA modulation of CPT-I activity
site of production of reactive oxygen species occurs
dominates or modifies intrinsic changes in the ma-
distal to the site of amytal block. Myxothiazole
lonyl-CoA sensitivity of CPT-I remains to be elu-
blocks electron entry into complex III
163
and blunts
cidated.
the production of reactive oxygen species by iso-
lated mitochondria
164
and by cardiomyocytes.
47
Thus, blockage of electron influx into complex III
Reperfusion predisposes to onset of mitochondrial
is a likely mechanism of amytal-mediated protec-
permeability transition (MPT)
tion.
Ischemic damage to complex IV also can con- Mitochondrial oxidative damage is enhanced during
reperfusion.
161
Increased calcium enhances mito-tribute to oxidative damage during reperfusion.
While direct production of reactive oxygen species chondrial calcium loading.
122–124
Enhanced mito-
chondrial oxidative damage and calcium loadingby complex IV does not occur, inhibition of com-
plex IV enhances oxidant-mediated cell death in predispose to the onset of MPT, which has been
observed in reperfused myocardium in situ duringvitro,
165
and does not protect against myocardial
oxidative damage during reperfusion.
158
Complex early reperfusion.
112,113
Based upon their greater
sensitivity to calcium-mediated damage,
90
MPTIV modulates the redox status of upstream ETC
complexes (Fig. 6). Electron flow through complex formation during reperfusion may involve largely
E. J. Lesnefsky et al.1080
SSM. Inhibitors of MPT decrease myocardial dam- heart model of aging.
93,96
Aging decreases the pro-
tein yield and rate of oxidative phosphorylation inage during ischemia and reperfusion.
169
MPT ap-
pears to be reversible during reperfusion, with IFM.
91,96
In contrast to aging defects in IFM, the
protein yield of SSM and the rate of oxidativeclosure of the permeability transition pore enhanced
by pyruvate oxidation during early reperfusion.
170
phosphorylation in SSM remains unaltered by
aging. Aging decreases the activity of ETC com-The contributions of MPT as an effector of oxidative
and calcium-mediated processes to reperfusion plexes III
96
and IV
91
in IFM. The activity of com-
plexes I and II does not decrease with age in IFM.
91
damage requires further investigation.
Aging-related decreases in fatty acid oxida-
tion
138,174
and complex IV activity
148,176
previously
described in mixed populations of cardiac mito-
Ischemic preconditioning
chondria were localized to IFM.
92
In previous
work by other laboratories, heart mitochondria
Brief periods of ischemia decrease the myocardial
isolated by tissue homogenization alone
177
that
damage that results from a subsequent prolonged
were expected to yield a population consisting of
period of ischemia.
125
Ischemic preconditioning
SSM, did not exhibit aging-related decreases in
ameliorates ischemic mitochondrial damage, im-
mitochondrial respiration. Previous results have
proving rates of oxidative phosphorylation toward
been reconciled by the finding that aging-related
rates observed in mitochondria from non-ischemic
decrements in mitochondrial respiration occur
hearts.
171
Preconditioning protection is mediated
selectively in IFM.
in part via activation of adenosine (A-1) receptors
An appreciation of the selective effect of aging
on the plasma membrane.
172
A-1 receptor ac-
on IFM is critical to the study of aging-related
tivation leads to activation of protein kinase C,
alterations in the heart. The use of tissue ho-
including the afii9830 isoform.
172
A major downstream
mogenization alone to isolate cardiac mitochondria
effector of preconditioning protection is activation
paradoxically targets for study the SSM population,
of the ATP-dependent potassium channel (K-
which is without aging-related oxidative defects.
AT P
mito
) in the inner mitochondrial mem-
Recent studies of mitochondrial physiology in the
brane.
172,173
Activation of K-ATP
mito
channels leads
aging heart, including the production of reactive
to partial depolarization of the inner membrane
173
oxygen species
178
and protein import,
179
found that
and to partial uncoupling with increased oxygen
aging did not alter these processes. However, the
consumption and decreased ATP synthesis.
171
techniques of mitochondrial isolation used in these
Mitochondrial calcium release also is increased.
171
studies very likely yielded only SSM. The study
Perhaps as a consequence of the increase in res-
of IFM, in which key aging-related alterations in
piration, the oxidation of FADH
2
is increased.
173
oxidative phosphorylation reside, without the con-
The partial uncoupling of respiration may de-
founding effects of admixed SSM that remain un-
crease the production of oxidants by mito-
altered by aging, will facilitate the study of
chondria. Calcium release and less oxidative
mitochondria-related mechanisms of dysfunction in
damage would be expected to decrease the like-
the aging heart.
lihood of MPT and cytochrome c release. The
mechanisms of mitochondrial-driven pre-
conditioning-mediated protection will require fur-
Molecular defects in complexes III and IV in aging IFM
ther study. The mechanism by which protein
kinase C activates the K-ATP
mito
channel remains
Aging decreased the rate of oxidative phos-
unclear at present.
phorylation stimulated by TMPD-ascorbate, an elec-
tron donor to complex IV via cytochrome c (Fig. 6)
in IFM.
92
The rate of uncoupled respiration was de-
creased, localizing the defect to the ETC.
92
The defect
Aging
in electron transport was present under both sub-
maximally and maximally expressed rates of ox-
Aging decreases oxidative phosphorylation selectively in
idative phosphorylation.
92
Complex IV activity
IFM
measured in permeabilized mitochondria in the pres-
ence of exogenous cytochrome c remained decreasedMitochondrial oxidative metabolism declines with
age in many tissues. Oxidative phosphorylation was in IFM, localizing the aging defect to complex IV
rather than to cytochrome c. The decrease in com-studied in SSM and IFM from 6-month adult and
24-month aging hearts using the Fischer 344 rat plex IV activity observed in permeabilized IFM from
Mitochondria in Cardiac Disease 1081
aging hearts was reversed by the addition of exo- injury in aging tissues.
180,181
Mitochondria isolated
from senescent animals exhibit higher rates of oxy-genous phospholipid liposomes.
92
In a mixed popu-
lation of cardiac mitochondria, aging-related radical production than do those from young an-
imals. H
2
O
2
generation increases by 25% indecreases in complex IV activity were reversed by
the addition of the phospholipid cardiolipin.
176
These mitochondria from 24-month-old rats.
182
Cardiac
mitochondria from elderly hearts sustain greaterfindings strongly suggest that the aging decrease in
complex IV is secondary to a defect in the phos- lipid peroxidation and injury following exposure to
exogenous iron and H
2
O
2
.
183
Mitochondria frompholipid environment, probably cardiolipin, of com-
plex IV. aging tissues have increased oxidative stress even in
the baseline state.
51,63
Cardiac mitochondria isolatedComplex IV requires cardiolipin,
142
especially car-
diolipin enriched in unsaturated acyl-groups,
143
for from elderly rats had an increased content of 8-
hydroxydeoxyguanosine, a marker of oxidativeoptimal activity. The findings in aging IFM suggest
that an aging-induced cardiolipin defect participates mtDNA damage, compared to adult controls.
63
The
mtDNA changes are observed in heart, but not inin the genesis of the complex IV defect. However, the
content of cardiolipin, quantified by lipid phos- liver,
63
suggestive of an increased susceptibility to
oxidative injury in cardiac mitochondria from eld-phorous,
143
is preserved in IFM from aging hearts
(Moghaddas, Lesnefsky, Hoppel, unpublished data). erly animals.
The recovery of cardiolipin from mitochondrial phos-
pholipids was excellent. A previous study only es-
timated cardiolipin content by UV absorbance (a
Aging-related mitochondrial defects may predispose to
function of acyl-group composition) relative to the
increased injury in the aging heart
other phospholipids without independent quan-
titation, suggesting that a decrease in relative car- The elderly heart sustains greater injury during
ischemia and reperfusion compared to the adultdiolipin composition occurred in aging heart
mitochondria.
148,176
The possible role of aging-related heart in both patients
184
and experimental mod-
els.
185–188
There is greater oxidative damage,
186
in-alterations in the composition, rather than in the
content of cardiolipin, in IFM requires further study. cluding oxidative protein modification,
186
as well as
calcium-mediated damage
122
compared to the adultThe rate of oxidative phosphorylation stimulated
by durohydroquinone, an electron donor to com- heart. The enhanced calcium-mediated and ox-
idative damage in the aging heart suggests mito-plex III, was decreased by aging in IFM, but not
in SSM.
97
The rate of uncoupled respiration was chondria-driven mechanisms of injury in the aging
heart. The addition of ischemic mitochondrial dam-decreased, localizing the aging defect to the electron
transport chain. Complex III activity was decreased age to pre-existing aging-related mitochondrial de-
fects is a likely mechanism of enhancedby aging in IFM, but remained unchanged in SSM.
97
The decrease in complex III activity was observed mitochondrial-derived injury in the aging heart.
109
Complex III, implicated as a source of reactiveunder both maximal and submaximal conditions.
97
Studies were performed to localize the site of the oxygen species during reperfusion in the adult
heart, is a probable source of enhanced oxidativeaging defect in complex III. Aging did not alter the
content of catalytic centers of complex III (cyto- damage during reperfusion in the aging heart.
109
The addition of ischemia-induced defects in complexchromes b and c
1
and iron–sulfur protein). Func-
tional studies of complex III activity localized the III to the preexisting aging-related defects can en-
hance mitochondrial-derived injury during re-aging defect to the cytochrome c binding site of
complex III.
97
However, the subunit peptides (sub- perfusion. Ischemia damages the iron–sulfur
subunit of complex III.
109
Aging causes a defect atunits VIII, X, and cytochrome c
1
) that compose the
cytochrome c binding site were present in complex the cytochrome c binding site.
97
Thus, at the onset
of reperfusion in the aging heart, complex III inIII isolated from aging IFM.
97
Thus, modification,
rather than loss, of peptide subunits that constitute IFM contains sequential defects in the path of elec-
tron flow. The two partial blocks in sequence arethe cytochrome c binding site is a likely mechanism
of the aging defect in complex III.
97
likely to act in concert to further slow electron
flow within complex III, increase the reduction of
cytochrome b, and enhance production of reactive
Aging increases oxidative damage in cardiac
oxygen species compared to either defect alone. An
mitochondria
increase in intracellular oxidative injury leads to
cell death by necrosis or apoptosis, processes thatAging defects present in cardiac mitochondria are
probable sources of the increase in chronic oxidative are increased in the aging heart during reperfusion.
E. J. Lesnefsky et al.1082
Cardiomyopathy and congestive heart failure studies have detected only neutral polymorphisms
in the cytochrome b gene despite decreases in com-
Considerable attention has been given to the po- plex III activity.
197
Thus, the relationship of mtDNA
mutations in cardiomyopathy to decreased activitytential role of mitochondrial defects in the genesis
of dilated cardiomyopathy in the adult. As a model, of ETC complexes and decreased mitochondrial ox-
idative phosphorylation remains to be established.inherited diseases of mitochondrial metabolism im-
pair oxidative phosphorylation in the heart, leading The potential for mitochondrial-derived myocyte
injury exists in the cardiomyopathic heart. In pa-to cardiac lactate production and globally hy-
pocontractile, dilated ventricles. The phenotype of cing-induced canine models of heart failure, mito-
chondrial production of reactive oxygen species isneonatal heart failure has been observed with de-
fects in ETC complexes I
189
and IV.
190
Defects in increased, with complex I the likely source.
195
In
addition to an increased production of reactivemitochondrial fatty acid oxidation also lead to this
phenotype.
191
While mutations in mtDNA impair oxygen species, mitochondria from the failing heart
release cytochrome c. Tumor necrosis factor pro-ETC activity, as observed in complexes I and IV,
defects in nuclear-encoded mitochondrial proteins duction is increased in failing hearts.
201,202
Tumor
necrosis factor leads to the production of the secondalso are frequent sources of cardiomyopathy.
97,192
Mutations in the nuclear genome not only account messenger ceramide,
203
which inhibits complex
III.
204
Decreased activity of complex III has beenfor defects referable to non-ETC proteins, but also
delete or alter nuclear-encoded ETC subunit pro- observed in the failing heart.
203–205
Ceramide-me-
diated inhibition of complex III increases the pro-teins, impairing the function of ETC complexes. The
MnSOD-homozygote mouse develops a cardio- duction of reactive oxygen species
205
and
predisposes to mitochondrial-driven apoptotic path-myopathy in the neonatal period, indicative of a
mitochondrial-driven cardiac phenotype.
193
The ways.
205,206
Extra-mitochondrial localization of cyto-
chrome c, accompanied by activation of theneonatal cardiomyopathy phenotype provides in-
sights into the mitochondrial mechanisms of cardio- downstream effector, caspase 3, are present in fail-
ing human hearts.
206,207
Thus, via either the in-myopathies observed in adults.
Experimental models support a role of mito- dependent or concerted action of oxidative damage
and cytochrome c release, mitochondria are likelychondrial defects in the genesis of cardiomyopathy.
Syrian hamster cardiomyopathy provides an animal contributors to the enhanced myocyte dropout ob-
served in the congestive heart failure state.model of human dilated cardiomyopathy.
91
The
cardiomyopathic hamster heart contains a defect
selective to IFM, whereas SSM are unaffected.
91
IFM
Summary
do not contain a defect in the ETC, but rather one
localized to the inner membrane and phos-
Mitochondrial damage leads to loss of mitochondrial
phorylation apparatus,
91
expected to impair energy
function, impairing energy production and cell
production. Decreases in mitochondrial respiration
physiology, and to the enhancement of pathologic
in experimental heart failure also are observed at
function, producing oxidative-, calcium-, and apo-
the myocyte level using saponin-skinned muscle
ptosis-mediated myocyte injury. Mitochondria are
bundles obtained from dogs with pacing-induced
key intermediates of myocyte damage during isch-
dilated cardiomyopathy and heart failure.
194
These
emia and reperfusion. These organelles are likely
experimental approaches provide key data sup-
contributors to the chronic, relentless myocyte in-
porting decrease in mitochondrial respiration in
jury that culminates in myocyte dropout in aging
cardiomyopathy and heart failure, data lacking in
and heart failure. Studies of mitochondrial function
human hearts.
in cardiac disease states using models ranging from
Enzyme activity of ETC complexes is decreased
isolated molecular constituents, through isolated
in hearts explanted from patients with end-stage
mitochondria and intact cells, to tissues and isolated
heart failure.
195–200
Decreases in complexes I, III,
organs will continue to provide new insights into
and IV have been reported. Other studies have
the mechanisms of mitochondrial damage and of
detected deletion mutations in mtDNA.
198,200
Un-
mitochondrial-mediated myocyte injury.
fortunately, data linking these two observations are,
in general, lacking. One report attempted to link the
two observations in a patient with cardiomyopathy
Acknowledgements
who had a point mutation in the mtDNA cyto-
chrome b gene and a concomitant decrease This work was supported by Grants
1RO1AG12447, 1K04AG00676 and 1POAGin complex III enzyme activity.
200
However, other
Mitochondria in Cardiac Disease 1083
exercise. Am J Physiol 2000; 279: H1490–H1501.
15885 from the National Institutes of Health, and
16. L G. Regulation of carbohydrate meta-
by the Office of Research and Development, Medical
bolism in ischemia and reperfusion. Am Heart J
Research Service, Department of Veterans Affairs.
2000; 139: S115–S119.
17. B RH, B DB, R JG, O MS.
Regulation of pyruvate dehydrogenase multi-
enzyme complex. Annu Rev Nutr 1993; 13: 497–
References
520.
18. B-K MM, D WI, W P, H RA,
1. C JD, V AL, H CR. The P KM. Evidence for existence of tissue-specific
regulation of mammalian pyruvate dehydrogenaseionic strength of the intermembrane space of intact
mitochondria is not affected by the pH or volume complex. Biochem J 1998; 329: 191–196.
19. W P, I K, B-K MM, P KM,of the intermembrane space. Biochim Biophys Acta
1992; 1100: 189–197. H RA. Mechanism responsible for inactivation
of skeletal muscle pyruvate dehydrogenase complex2. G SS, H CR. Multidimensional dif-
fusion modes and collision frequencies of cyto- in starvation and diabetes. Diabetes 1999; 48:
1593–1599.chrome c with its redox partners. J Biol Chem 1988;
263: 5241–5247. 20. G EW, W JA, S WC, N RA.
Myocardial substrate utilization during exercise in3. V  K IJ, V M, N W.Amor-
phological view on mitochondrial protein targeting. humans; Dual carbon-labeled carbohydrate isotope
experiments. J Clin Invest 1988; 82: 2017–2025.Microsc Res Tech 1994; 27: 284–293.
4. B D, W T. The importance of the 21. MC JG, H AP, D RM. Role
of calcium ions in regulation of mammalian in-outer mitochondrial compartment in regulation of
energy metabolism. Mol Cell Biochem 1994; 133/ tramitochondrial metabolism. Physiol Rev 1990;
70: 391–425.134: 69–83.
5. H CL, K J, T P, T J,T 22. MG JD, M SE, L CS, F DW. Ob-
servations on the affinity for carnitine, and malonyl-B. The malonyl-CoA-sensitive form of carnitine pal-
mitoyltransferase is not localized exclusively in the CoA sensitivity, of carnitine palmitoyltransferase I
in animal and human tissues. Biochem J 1983;outer membrane of rat liver mitochondria. J Biol
Chem 1998; 273: 23495–23503. 214: 21–28.
23. S M, G J, W LA, L GD.6. F F, Z VA. Enrichment of carnitine
palmitoyltransferase I and II in the contact sites Acetyl-CoA carboxylase regulation of fatty acid
oxidation in the heart. J Biol Chem 1993; 268:of rat liver mitochondria. Biochem J 1998; 329:
225–229. 255836–25845.
24. H C, S ED. Malonyl-CoA meta-7. N K, R M, W T, D R, H
R. The role of contact sites between inner and bolism in cardiac myocytes. Biochem J 2000; 350:
61–67.outer mitochondrial membrane in energy transfer.
Biochim Biophys Acta 1990; 1018: 229–233. 25. V G, G MJ, D P TG, G M.
Malonyl-CoA-independent acute control of hepatic8. T P, K J, H CL. A 22 kDa polyanion
inhibits carnitine-dependent fatty acid oxidation carnitine plamitoyltransferase I activity. Role of
Ca
2+
/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II andin rat liver mitochondria. FEBS Lett 1999; 460:
241–245. cytoskeletal components. J Biol Chem 1998; 273:
21497–21504.9. Z VA, F F, O CG. Regulation
of mitochondrial outer-membrane carnitine pal- 26. K N, B AJ, B RL, D S, L
GD. High rates of fatty acid oxidation during re-mitoyltransferase (CPTI): role of membrane-to-
pology. Adv Enzyme Reg 1997; 37: 295–317. perfusion of ischemic hearts are associated with a
decrease in malonyl-CoA levels due to an increase10. K J, Z E, G D, B LL. Charac-
terization of the malonyl-CoA-sensitive carnitine in 5′-AMP-activated protein kinase inhibition of
acetyl-CoA carboxylase. J Biol Chem 1995; 270:palmitoyltransferase (CPT
o
) of a rat heart mito-
chondrial particle: Evidence that the catalytic unit 17513–17520.
27. S H, P K. Supercomplexes in theis CPT
i
. J Biol Chem 1994; 269: 8209–8219.
11. B D, B K, K M, A V, respiratory chains of yeast and mammalian mito-
chondria. EMBO J 2000; 19: 1777–1783.N VK. Characterization and metabolic func-
tion of mitochondrial contact sites. Biochim Biophys 28. S LA, P-C SY, F IM, W
JE. Resolution of the membrane domain of bovineActa 1990; 1018: 234–238.
12. K J, H CL. Fatty acid import into mito- complex I into subcomplexes: implications for the
structural organization of the enzyme. Biochemistrychondria. Biochim Biophys Acta 2000; 1486: 1–17.
13. O LH. Cardiac metabolism—emergence, decline, 2000; 39: 7229–7235.
29. L CR, K A. Succinate: quinoneand resurgence. Part II. Cardiovasc Res 1992; 26:
817–830. oxidoreductases: new insights from X-ray crystal
structures. Biochim Biophys Acta 2000; 1459: 422–14. G GW, A F, D T, T H.
Energy provision from glycogen, glucose, and fatty 431.
30. X D, Y CA, K H, X JZ, K AM, Zacids on adrenergic stimulation of isolated working
rat hearts. Am J Physiol 1998; 274: H1239–H1247. L, Y L, D J. Crystal structure of the
cytochrome bc1 complex from bovine heart mito-15. G GW, T H. Improved energy
homeostasis of the heart in the metabolic state of chondria. Science 1997; 277: 60–66.
E. J. Lesnefsky et al.1084
31. C CE, N P, F JA. Cytochrome transport chain. Mol Cell Biochem 1998; 184: 21–
33.c oxidase: structure, function, and membrane to-
pology of the polypeptide subunits. Biochem Cell 49. H B, G JMC. Oxygen toxicity,
oxygen radicals, transition metals and disease. Bio-Biol 1991; 69: 586–607.
32. M P. Possible mechanisms of the pro- chem J 1984; 219: 1–14.
50. S A. Lipid Peroxidation, Membrane Damage,tonmotive function of cytochrome systems. J Theor
Biol 1976; 62: 327–367. and Phospholipase A
2
action. Cellular Antioxidant
Defense Mechanisms, Vol. II. CRC Press, Boca Raton,33. D J, K M. Relationship between ox-
idative phosphorylation and adenine nucleotide FL, 1988.
51. R C, P JW, A BN. Normal oxidativetranslocase activity of two populations of cardiac
mitochondria and mechanical recovery of ischemic damage to mitochondrial and nuclear DNA is ex-
tensive. Proc Nat Acad Sci 1988; 85: 6465–6467.hearts following reperfusion. Can J Physiol Phar-
macol 1989; 67: 704–709. 52. R R, T JF, C LY, B KM, C
JD, F BA. Detection of catalase in rat heart34. S M. Oxidative phosphorylation at the fin
de siecle. Science 1999; 283: 1488–1493. mitochondria. J Biol Chem 1991; 266: 22028–
22034.35. P S, G F, C N. A possible role
of slips in cytochrome c oxidase in the antioxygen 53. S TW, J IS. Relative importance of
intracellular glutathione peroxidase and catalase indefense system of the cell. Biosci Rep 1997; 17:
23–31. vivo for prevention of peroxidation to the heart.
Cardiovasc Res 1989; 23: 774–779.36. C B, W GR. Respiratory enzymes in
oxidative phosphorylation. III. The steady state. 54. L EJ, D IM, H LD. Myocardial
sulfhydryl pool alterations occur during reperfusionJohnson Research Foundation, University of Penn-
sylvania, Philadelphia, PA, pp. 409–427, 1955. after brief and prolonged myocardial ischemia in
vivo. Circ Res 1991; 68: 605–613.37. R D, B F. Mitochondrial uncoupling
proteins: from mitochondria to the regulation of 55. L EJ. Reduction of infarct size by cell-
permeable oxygen metabolite scavengers. Free Radenergy balance. J Physiol 2000; 529: 3–10.
38. B O, H T, L BB. Uncoupling proteins 2 Biol Med 1992; 12: 429–446.
56. A M, I H, K T, Y M, E K,and 3: potential regulators of mitochondrial energy
metabolism. Diabetes 2000; 49: 143–156. U M, C N, N Y. Mitochondrial
phospholipid hydroperoxide glutathione peroxidase39. T JF, B A. Generation of superoxide
anion by the NADH dehydrogenase of bovine heart plays a major role in preventing oxidative injury
to cells. J Biol Chem 1999; 274: 4924–4933.mitochondria. Biochem J 1980; 191: 421–427.
40. T JF. Superoxide production by the mito- 57. R S, ME GE, M AT, R BH.
Superoxides from mitochondrial complex III: thechondrial respiratory chain. Biosci Rep 1997; 17:
3–8. role of manganese superoxide dismutase. Free Rad
Biol Med 2000; 29: 170–180.41. S K, N M, T-N H, M-
 H, T-K S, I Y. M 58. G SA, M JJ. Thioltransferase is a specific
glutathionyl mixed disulfide oxidoreductase. Bio- O
2
−
generation in reduction and oxidation cycle
of ubiquinones in a model of mitochondrial electron chemistry 1993; 32: 3368–3376.
59. S DW, C Y, B CP, L EJ,transport systems. Biochim Biophys Acta 1988; 936:
377–385. M JJ. Sensitivity of protein sulfhydryl repair
enzymes to oxidative stress. Free Rad Biol Med 1997;42. T JF, A A, L AL. Ubi-
semiquinone is the electron donor for superoxide 23: 373–384.
60. C DL, S RH, B VA. Mitochondrialformation by complex III of heart mitochondria.
Arch Biochem Biophys 1985; 237: 408–414. DNA repair pathways. Mutat Res 1999; 434: 137–
148.43. B GT, V C. Discrete steps in dioxygen
activation—the cytochrome oxidase/O
2
reaction. J 61. B VA, A RM. Mitochondrial DNA repair
pathways. J Bioenerg Biomembr 1999; 31: 391–398.Bioenerg Biomemb 1993; 252: 71–80.
44. K LK, S RS. Substrate and site specificity 62. T M, H M, S S, H
K, I T, O T. Age-associated damage in mito-of hydrogen peroxide generation in mouse mito-
chondria. Arch Biochem Biophys 1998; 350: 118– chondrial function in rat hearts. Exp Gerontol 1993;
28: 269–280.126.
45. L SS. Cooperation of a ‘‘reactive oxygen cycle’’ 63. W DC. Mitochondrial defects in cardio-
myopathy and neuromuscular disease. Am Heart Jwith the Q cycle and the proton cycle in the res-
piratory chain-superoxide generating and cycling 2000; 139: S70–S85.
64. C-D M, S JM, L MT, W-mechanisms in mitochondria. J Bioenerg Biomembr
1999; 31: 367–376.  DC. Association of mitochondrial DNA damage
with aging and coronary atherosclerotic heart dis-46. D MJ. Direct detection of radical production in
the ischaemic and reperfused myocardium: current ease. Mutat Res 1992; 275: 169–180.
65. N P, M IR, B A, M RJ,status. Free Rad Res Comm 1989; 7: 275–284.
47. B LB, V H TL, S Z-H, L C-Q, V F, W ZX, Z C, L AW.
Mitochondrial DNA mutation associated with agingS PT. Generation of superoxide in car-
diomyocytes during ischemia before reperfusion. and degenerative disease. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1992;
673: 92–102.Am J Physiol 1999; 277: H2240–H2246.
48. D OV, K BN, S VP. A model 66. L CM, L ME, W R, A JM. As-
sociation of age-related mitochondrial ab-of O
2
−
generation in the complex III of the electron
Mitochondria in Cardiac Disease 1085
normalities with skeletal muscle fiber atrophy. Free caused by lysosomal loading of Ca(2+)-indicating
Rad Biol Med 1998; 25: 964–972. fluorophores. Biophys J 2000; 79: 39–50.
67. T RW, C PF, T DM, L- 82. S LM, S N. Localization of di-
 RN. In-vitro genetic modification of mito- chlorofluorescin in cardiac myocytes: implications
chondrial function. Hum Reprod 2000; 15 Suppl 2: for assessment of oxidative stress. Am J Physiol
79–85. 2000; 278: H982–H990.
68. M-H J. Cytochrome-c-oxidase deficient 83. G AK, W RJ, W HV, V D
cardiomyocytes in the human heart—an age-re-
M R, T JM. Quantification of the con-
lated phenomenon. A histochemical ultra-
tribution of various steps to the control of mito-
cytochemical study. Am J Pathol 1989; 134:
chondrial respiration. J Biol Chem 1982; 257:
1167–1173.
2754–2757.
69. K CM. Protein translocation pathways of the
84. G FN, B R, K W. Control of
mitochondrion. FEBS Lett 2000; 476: 27–31.
mitochondrial respiration. The contribution of the
70. L T. Targeting of proteins to mitochondria.
adenine nucleotide translocator depends on the
FEBS Lett 2000; 476: 22–26.
ATP- and ADP-consuming enzymes. Biochim Bio-
71. H B, K H, N W. Receptor sites
phys Acta 1983; 722: 381–391.
involved in posttranslational transport of apo-
85. B V, M V, B GC, B MD.
cytochrome c into mitochondria: specificity, affinity,
Control and kinetic analysis of ischemia-damaged
and number of sites. Proc Natl Acad Sci 1983; 80:
heart mitochondria: which parts of the oxidative
4963–4967.
phosphorylation system are affected by ischemia?
72. L T, N W. Regulated protein de-
Biochim Biophys Acta 1995; 1272: 154–158.
gradation in mitochondria. Experientia 1996; 52:
86. P JW, T B, H CL. Biochemical
1069–1076.
properties of subsarcolemmal and interfibrillar
73. N XH, Z J, L J, Y Y, C SH, F AH,
mitochondria isolated from rat cardiac muscle. J
B RJ, P MA. Signaling and expression
Biol Chem 1977; 252: 8731–8739.
for mitochondrial membrane proteins during left
87. L EJ, T B, Y J, S TJ, T J,
ventricular remodeling and contractile failure after
H CL. Myocardial ischemia decreases oxidative
myocardial infarction. J Am Coll Cardiol 2000; 36:
phosphorylation through complex IV in sub-
282–287.
sarcolemmal mitochondria. Am J Physiol 1997;
74. N JR, R MJ, W JT, M HE.
273: H1544–H1554.
Effects of ischemia on function and metabolism of
88. S G, S M, S T, K A, S
the isolated working rat heart. Am J Physiol 1973;
H, O R. Detection of mitochondrial membrane
225: 651–658.
damages in myocardial ischemia with ESR spin
75. E FR, W EO, G WN, H GL,
labeling technique. J Mol Cell Cardiol 1989; 21:
A CS. Protective effect of increased glycolytic
1029–1036.
substrate against systolic and diastolic dysfunction
89. P JW, T B, H CL. Biochemical
and increased coronary resistance from prolonged
differences between subsarcolemmal and in-
global under perfusion and reperfusion in isolated
terfibrillar mitochondria from rat cardiac muscle:
rabbit hearts perfused with erythrocyte sus-
effects of procedural manipulations. Archiv Biochem
pensions. Circ Res 1991; 68: 466–481.
Biophys 1985; 236: 691–702.
76. L GD, S MA. Energy substrate
90. P JW, T B, H CL. Heterogeneous
utilization by isolated working hearts from newborn
response of subsarcolemmal heart mitochondria to
rabbits. Am J Physiol 1990; 258: H1274–H1280.
calcium. Am J Physiol 1986; 250: H741–H748.
77. D T, G PH, C JM, Z R,
91. H CL, T B, P W, T JS,
T H. Fasting, lactate, and insulin improve
A LD. Hamster cardiomyopathy. A defect in
ischemia tolerance in rat heart: a comparison with
oxidative phosphorylation in the cardiac in-
ischemic preconditioning. Am J Physiol 1996; 270:
terfibrillar mitochondria. J Biol Chem 1982; 257:
H1607–H1615.
1540–1548.
78. C CB, F AA, W JM, H
92. F SW, L EJ, S TJ, H MO,
AH, B A. Postischemic administration of
H CL. Aging selectively decrease oxidative
succinate reverses the impairment of oxidative
capacity in rat heart interfibrillar mitochondria.
phosphorylation after cardiac ischemia and re-
Arch Biochem Biophys 1999; 372: 399–407.
perfusion injury. Circulation 1997; 96 (Suppl II): II-
93. P HM, S O, S M, S P,
260–II-265.
H JF, S PG. Development of isch-
79. D L F, B PS, C R, G G,
emia-induced damage in defined mitochondrial sub-
S HS, S MD, H RG. Mito-
populations. J Mol Cell Cardiol 1985; 17: 885–896.
chondrial membrane potential in single living adult
94. S VA, K AV, K VV, M
rat cardiac myocytes exposed to anoxia or metabolic
MV, J WE. Creatine kinase of rat heart mito-
inhibition. J Physiol 1995; 486: 1–13.
chondria. The demonstration of functional coupling
80. M KK, S MS, C RA.
to oxidative phosphorylation in an inner mem-
Changes in mitochondrial function induced in isol-
brane-matrix preparation. J Biol Chem 1985; 260:ated guinea-pig ventricular myocytes by calcium
7757–7764.overload. J Physiol 1994; 476: 459–471.
95. C JD, V AL, H CR. Per-81. T DR, C WE, L JJ. Mito-
sistence of cytochrome c binding to membranes atchondrial calcium transients in adult rabbit cardiac
myocytes: inhibition by ruthenium red and artifacts physiological mitochondrial intermembrane space
E. J. Lesnefsky et al.1086
ionic strength. Biochim Biophys Acta 1995; 1228: apoptosis by Bcl-2; release of cytochrome c from
mitochondria blocked. Science 1997; 275: 1129–216–228.
96. H C, C C. Studies on the nucleotide 1132.
112. L F, S A, W Y, A RC, T-specificity of mitochondrial inner membrane part-
icles. Arch Biochem Biophys 1969; 135: 184–193.  KJ, F L. Cells-specific induction of apoptosis
by microinjection of cytochrome c, Bcl-x has ac-97. L EJ, G TI, M S, M CT,
S MI, T PJ, H CL. Aging decreases tivity independent of cytochrome c release. J Biol
Chem 1997; 272: 30299–30305.electron transport complex III activity in heart
interfibrillar mitochondria by alteration of the cyto- 113. C M. The mitochondrial permeability
transition pore and its role in cell death. Biochem Jchrome c binding site. J Mol Cell Cardiol 2001; 33:
37–47. 1990; 341: 233–249.
114. K YE, S PM. Prooxidants open98. M-Y A, H Y. Ubiquinol:cytochrome
c oxidoreductase. Effects of inhibitors on reverse both the mitochondrial permeability transition pore
and a low-conductance channel in the inner mito-electron transfer from the iron-sulfur protein to
cytochrome b. J Biol Chem 1999; 274: 9283–9288. chondrial membrane. Arch Biochem Biophys 2000;
376: 377–388.99. R W. Mitochondrial complexes I, II, III, IV
and V in myocardial ischemia and autolysis. Am J 115. S S, B D, J D, S A,
S U, W S, W M, W T.Physiol 1983; 244: H743–H748.
100. B JA, W ML, J WE. Creatine Octamerdimer transition of mitochondrial creatine
kinase in heart disease. J Mol Cell Cardiol 1999; 31:kinase of heart mitochondria. The progressive loss
of enzyme activity during in vivo ischemia and its 857–866.
116. O’G E, B G, D M, K AP,correlation to depressed myocardial function. J Biol
Chem 1985; 260: 208–214. B D, W T. The role of creatine
kinase in inhibition of mitochondrial permeability101. C PB, S DW, C ME, C WA J,
G RW, S BE. Electrophysiological effects of transition. FEBS Lett 1997; 414: 253–257.
117. S O, D M, W T, Ramphiphiles on canine purkinje fibers. Implications
for dysrhythmia secondary to ischemia. Circ Res C. Mitochondrial creatine kinase is a prime target
of peroxynitrite-induced modification and in-1981; 49: 354–363.
102. C PB, S BE. Arrhythmogenic properties of activation. J Biol Chem 1998; 273: 16694–16699.
118. B MYU, K VV, Z G. Modu-phospholipid metabolites associated with myo-
cardial ischemia. Fed Proc 1983; 42: 2454–2459. lation of the mitochondrial permeability transition
by nitric oxide. Eur J Biochem 1997; 246: 710–718.103. C PB, G RW, S BE. Amphipathic meta-
bolites and membrane dysfunction in ischemic myo- 119. A S, G RA, B BM. Lack of release
of cytochrome C from mitochondria into cytosolcardium. Circ Res 1984; 55: 135–154.
104. K MT, S JE, C PB, S BE. The early in the course of Fas-mediated apoptosis of
Jurkat cells. J Biol Chem 1998; 273: 19892–19894.dependence of electrophysiological derangements
on accumulation of endogenous long-chain acyl 120. P D, Z-P R, Z M. Apoptosis
and proliferation of cardiomyocytes in heart failurecarnitine in hypoxic neonatal rat myocytes. Circ
Res 1986; 58: 230–240. of different etiologies. Cardiovasc Pathol 2000; 9:
149–152.105. O H, T H, I T, U M, O
K, T K, S T, O T, M A, N- 121. W JY. Age and the cardiovascular system. NEJM
1992; 327: 1735–1739. A, K T. In vitro study on contribution
of oxidative metabolism of isolated rabbit heart 122. A K, C D, L S, J E, F
H. Effect of aging on intracellular Ca
2+
, pHi, andmitochondria to myocardial reperfusion injury. Circ
Res 1984; 55: 168–175. contractility during ischemia and reperfusion. Cir-
culation 1992; 86: II371–II376.106. L G, B C, F G, C GP.
Mitochondria, oxidative stress, and antioxidant de- 123. G GJ, D S, S PG. Ruthenium
red improves postischemic contractile function infenses. Acta Biochim Pol 1999; 46: 1–21.
107. L G, D’A M, M P M, G isolated rat hearts. J Cardiovasc Pharm 1990; 16:
783–789.ML, V B, B C, F G, P
C G. Mitochondrial bioenergetics in aging. 124. G TE, P DR. Mechanisms by which
mitochondria transport calcium. Am J Physiol 1990;Biochim Biophys Acta 2000; 1459: 397–404.
108. T JF, B M, B J, C UB, 258: C755–C786.
125. M CE, R VJ, R KA, J RB.MC JM. Mitochondrial generation of oxygen
radicals during reoxygenation of ischemic tissues. Ischemic preconditioning slows energy metabolism
and delays ultrastructural damage during a sus-Free Rad Res Comm 1991; 12–13: 681–689.
109. L EJ, G TI, M CT, S MI, H tained ischemic episode. Circ Res 1990; 66: 913–
931.MO, T PJ, H CL. Ischemic injury to
mitochondrial electron transport in the aging heart: 126. F W, A J, F P, M
M, V B H. Mitochondrial function in myo-damage to the iron–sulfur protein subunit of elec-
tron transport complex III. Arch Biochem Biophys cardial stunning. J Mol Cell Cardiol 1991; 23: 1–11.
127. A GK, C VR. Myocardial ischemia: cor-2001; 385: 117–128.
110. G DR, R JC. Mitochondria and apoptosis. relation of mitochondrial adenine nucleotide and
respiratory function. J Mol Cell Cardiol 1984; 16:Science 1998; 281: 1309–1316.
111. Y J, L X, B K, K CN, I AM, 439–448.
128. R W, B CW, G IL. ATP depletionC J, P TI, J DP, W X. Prevention of
Mitochondria in Cardiac Disease 1087
and mitochondrial functional loss during ischemia and analogues of cardiolipin. Biochim Biophys Acta
1990; 1020: 34–42.in slow and fast heart-rate hearts. Am P Physiol
1990; 259: H1759–H1766. 144. O’B PJ. Intracellular mechanisms for the de-
composition of a lipid peroxide. I. Decomposition of129. R W, B CW, G F, C G.
ATPase activity, IF1 content, and proton con- a lipid peroxide by metal ions, heme compounds,
and nucleophiles. Can J Biochem 1969; 47: 485–ductivity of ESMP from control and ischemic slow
and fast heart-rate hearts. J Bioenerg Biomembr 499.
145. P NL, Z CW, S HHO. Free1995; 27: 459–466.
130. N H. Generation of superoxide radicals as by- radical-induced alterations of myocardial mem-
brane proteins. Arch Biochem Biophys 1991; 289:product of cellular respiration. Ann Biol Clin 1994;
52: 199–204. 118–123.
146. T A, D P, P A, J A.131. R W, R S. Impaired function of
mitochondrial electron transfer complex I in canine Mitochondrial functions in ischemic myocardium.
I. Proton electrochemical gradient, inner membranemyocardial ischemia: loss of flavin mononucleotide.
J Mol Cell Cardiol 1983; 15: 537–542. permeability, calcium transport and oxidative phos-
phorylation in isolated mitochondria. J Mol Cell132. K H, X D, Y CA, X JZ, K AM, Z
L, Y L, D J. Inhibitor binding changes Cardiol 1979; 11: 57–76.
147. U H, O R, S M, K A,domain mobility in the iron–sulfur protein of the
mitochondrial bc1 complex from bovine heart. Proc S G. Spin trapping on cardiac submitochondrial
particles isolated from ischemic and non-ischemicNatl Acad Sci 1998; 95: 8026–8033.
133. M T, Y L, Y CA. Hematoporphyrin-promoted myocardium. J Mol Cell Cardiol 1990; 22: 893–899.
148. P G, R FM, P G, Q-photo inactivation of mitochondrial ubiquinol-cyto-
chrome c reductase: selective destruction of the  E. Age-dependent decrease in the cyto-
chrome c oxidase activity and changes inhistidine ligands of the iron–sulfur cluster and pro-
tective effect of ubiquinone. Biochemistry 1991; 30: phospholipids in rat-heart mitochondria. Arch
Gerontol Geriatr 1993; 16: 263–272.230–238.
134. D E, M-Z T, H OM, 149. A A, M A, P E, L D,
D J, M L, P G, C F.S CH, L TA, T BL. Alteration of
the midpoint potential and catalytic activity of the Effect of ischemia and reperfusion on antioxidant
enzymes and mitochondrial inner membrane pro-rieske iron–sulfur protein by changes of amino acids
forming hydrogen bonds to the iron–sulfur cluster. teins in perfused rat heart. Biochim Biophys Acta
1988; 970: 113–121.J Biol Chem 1998; 273: 9085–9093.
135. R NC, S F, T L. Investigation 150. P DF, K KA, MM JB. Carnitine palm-
itoyltransferase in cardiac ischemia. A potential siteof the essential boundary layer phospholipids of
cytochrome c oxidase using triton X-100 de- for altered fatty acid metabolism. Circ Res 1991;
68: 1085–1094.lipidation. Biochemistry 1980; 19: 3656–3661.
136. V SB, C RA. Lipid requirements for cyto- 151. D KJ, D ME. Protein damage and
degradation by oxygen radicals. III. Modification ofchrome c oxidase activity. Biochemistry 1997; 16:
5755–5759. secondary and tertiary structure. J Biol Chem 1987;
262: 9908–9913.137. L EJ, S TJ, S MSK, M PJ,
H CL. Myocardial ischemia selectively depletes 152. S M, M CL, A S. Mitochondrial
hydrogen peroxide generation and activities of glu-cardiolipin in rabbit heart subsarcolemmal mito-
chondria. Am J Physiol 2001 (in press). tathione peroxidase and superoxide dismutase fol-
lowing global ischemia. J Mol Cell Cardiol 1987;138. E Y,   M E, S D, K JCN,
S C, L A. Normothermic ischemic 19: 1195–1206.
153. F T-HM, X J, P TS, K M, C MV,cardiac arrest of the isolated working rat heart. Circ
Res 1983; 53: 663–678. D JM. Diazoxide inhibits mitochondrial cyto-
chrome c release in ischemic rabbit myocardium.139. P G, P G, P M, D
N, S D, R FM. Lipid peroxidation and Circulation 1999; 100: I–630 (abstract).
154. F T. Cytochrome c pI. Acta Chem Scandalterations to oxidative metabolism in mitochondria
isolated from rat heart subjected to ischemia and 1966; 20: 1476–1486.
155. S Y, H K, K S, O N, Y K.reperfusion. Free Rad Biol Med 1999; 27: 42–50.
140. K K, P DF, H H, Y BY, E- Loss of molecular interaction between cytochrome c
and cardiolipin due to lipid peroxidation. Biochem ML, MM-W JB. Protection by vera-
pamil of mitochondrial glutathione equilibrium and Biophys Res Comm 1999; 264: 343–347.
156. R M, K PKJ. Evidence for two dis-phospholipid changes during reperfusion of isch-
emic canine myocardium. Circ Res 1987; 61: 301– tinct acidic phospholipid-binding sites in cyto-
chrome c. J Biol Chem 1994; 269: 1770–1774.310.
141. V SC, B GP. Membrane changes induced 157. V K, H A, C D, P
H, H L. Global ischaemia induces a biphasicby early myocardial ischemia in the dog. Can J
Biochem 1980; 58: 1112–1119. response of the mitochondrial respiratory chain.
Anoxic pre-perfusion protects against ischaemic142. H FL. Cardiolipins and biomembrane function.
Biochim Biophys Acta 1992; 1113: 71–133. damage. Biochem J 1992; 281: 709–715.
158. A G, Z JL, D C, K P,143. A DA, M D, P GL. Activation
of beef heart cytochrome c oxidase by cardiolipin S G, E PP, T I, C P, C
E. J. Lesnefsky et al.1088
M, C M, F JT. Evidence that mito- of mitochondrial respiration in senescence. J Cell
Physiol 1972; 80: 141–148.chondrial respiration is a source of potentially toxic
oxygen free radical in intact rabbit hearts subjected 175. H RG. Lipid oxidation by heart mito-
chondria from young adult and senescent rats.to ischemia and reflow. J Biol Chem 1993; 268:
18432–18541. Biochem J 1978; 170: 285–295.
176. P G, R FM, P G, G159. S M, G KP, A S. Hydrogen
peroxide generation by mitochondria isolated from MN, Q E. Effect of aging and acetyl-L-
carnitine on the activity of cytochrome oxidaseregionally ischemic and nonischemic dog myo-
cardium. Bas Res Cardiol 1990; 85: 318–329. and adenine nucleotide translocase in rat heart
mitochondria. FEBS Lett 1994; 350: 213–215.160. P JW, C YS, K YH, K CH, K MS.
Ischemic preconditioning reduces Op6 generation 177. P G, R FM, P G, Q-
 E. Age-dependent impairment of mito-and prevents respiratory impairment in the mito-
chondria of post-ischemic reperfused heart of rat. chondrial function in rat heart tissue. Effect of
pharmacological agents. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1996;Life Sci 1997; 60: 2207–2219.
161. A G, F JT. Effects of the superoxide 86: 252–263.
178. M C, F M, G C, Cradical scavenger superoxide dismutase, and of the
hyroxyl radical scavenger mannitol, on reperfusion CM. Mitochondrial function and superoxide gen-
eration from submitochondrial particles of aged ratinjury in isolated rabbit hearts. Cardiovasc Drugs
Ther 1992; 6: 623–632. hearts. Biochim Biophys Acta 1990; 1015: 200–
204.162. O JG, L P, B U. Three classes of
inhibitors share a common binding domain in mito- 179. C EE, H DA. Influence of aging on protein
import into cardiac mitochondria. Am J Physiolchondrial complex I (NADH:ubiquinone oxido-
reductase). J Biol Chem 1999; 274: 2625–2630. 1997; 272: H2983–H2988.
180. K LK, S RS. Age-related changes in ac-163. T BL. The protonmotive Q cycle. J Biol
Chem 1990; 265: 11409–11412. tivities of mitochondrial electron transport com-
plexes in various tissues of the mouse. Arch Biochem164. B B, D AJ. Mitochondrial mutations
may increase oxidative stress: implications for car- Biophys 2000; 373: 16–22.
181. B G. Mitochondrial free radical production andcinogenesis and aging. Free Rad Biol Med 1990; 8:
523–539. aging in mammals and birds. Ann N Y Acad Sci
1998; 854: 224–238.165. D TL, G GL, N AL, H B,
L JJ. Mitochondria as a source of reactive 182. M C, C CM, G C. Age-
dependent production of mitochondrial hydrogenoxygen species during reductive stress in rat hepa-
tocytes. Am K Physiol 1993; 264: C961–C966. peroxide, lipid peroxides, and fluorescent pigments
in the rat heart. Basic Res Card 1990; 85: 172–178.166. H O, K B, B-T J. Mitochondria
uncoupling by a long chain fatty acyl analogue. J 183. C BJ, M PS, A T, V LD,
O RD. Aging alters the force–frequency re-Biol Chem 1998; 273: 3937–3942.
167. F E, S J, A BA, D S, K J. lationship and toxicity of oxidative stress in rabbit
heart. Life Sci 1991; 48: 1769–1777.Relation between myocardial substrate utilization,
oxygen consumption and regional oxygen balance 184. L EJ, L CF, H JM, N R,
R JS, G SW, C RM, R AM.in the dog heart in vivo. Arch Int Physiol Biochim
1986; 94: 285–293. Increased left ventricular dysfunction in elderly
patients despite successful thrombolysis: the168. K JA, K AJ, M GA, P MA,
H JD. Effect of perhexiline and oxfenicine on GUSTO-I angiographic experience. J Am Coll Cardiol
1996; 28: 331–337.myocardial function and metabolism during low-
flow ischemia/reperfusion in the isolated rat heart. 185. L EJ, G DS, Y J, W TS,
L WD. Aging increases ischemia-reperfusion in-J Cardiovasc Pharm 2000; 36: 794–801.
169. G EJ, H AP. Protection by cyclo- jury in the isolated, buffer perfused heart. J Lab Clin
Med 1994; 124: 843–851.sporin A of ischemia/reperfusion-induced damage
in isolated rat hearts. J Mol Cell Cardiol 1993; 25: 186. L DT, S LI. Cardiac reperfusion injury:
aging, lipid peroxidation, and mitochondrial dys-1461–1469.
170. C M. Mitochondrial intermembrane junc- function. Proc Natl Acad Sci 1998; 95: 510–514.
187. F VV, F RA, M LS, Ftional complexes and their role in cell death. J
Physiol 2000; 529: 11–21. VE. Age-dependent effects of ischemia and re-
perfusion on cardiac function and Ca
2+
transport171. H EL, J S, D PP, J-
 A, T A. Mitochondrial ATP-sensitive in myocardium. Gerontology 1991; 37: 233–239.
188. L L, A G, G W, Z X, W JY. Bcl-2 andK+channels modulate cardiac mitochondrial func-
tion. Am J Physiol 1998; 275: H1567–H1576. Bax expression in adult rat hearts after coronary
occlusion:age-associated differences. Am J Physiol172. D J JW, D J R, K E, B S.
The role of adenosine in preconditioning. Pharmacol 1998; 275: R315–R322.
189. L JL, S JA, T JM, J AJ,Ther 2000; 87: 141–149.
173. L Y, S T, O’R B, M E. Mitochondrial T RH, S RC,   H LP.
Isolated complex I deficiency in children: clinical,ATP-dependent potassium channels: novel effectors
of cardioprotection? Circulation 1998; 97: 2463– biochemical and genetic aspects. Hum Mutat 2000;
15: 123–134.2469.
174. C JC, W JB, S DR. Regulation 190.  C R, D M L. Mitochondrial
Mitochondria in Cardiac Disease 1089
cytopathies and neuromuscular disorders. Acta mitochondrial respiratory chain in human dilated
cardiomyopathy. Eur Heart J 1990; 11: 509–516.Neurol Belg 2000; 100: 156–161.
200. M-G J, H Y, A R,191. T I. Neonatal metabolic myopathies. Semin Per-
P ME, P GL, G MJ. A pointinatol 1999; 23: 125–151.
mutation in the cyt b gene of cardiac mtDNA192. H J, K P, F D, A H,
associated with complex III deficiency in ischemic
H J, K M, H H,
cardiomyopathy. Biochem Mol Biol Int 1996; 40:
H’ H, C SK, R T, K
487–495.
S, S L, Z J. A novel deficiency of
201. K T, M M, A RJ, K
mitochondrial ATPase of nuclear origin. Hum Mol
R, R WD, D AJ, S MJ,
Genet 1999; 8: 1967–1974.
D GW, H R, MT CF, M DL,
193. M S, C P, P M, T R, C
F AM, MN DM. Expression of pro-
B, J AS, Z TH, D M, G
inflammatory cytokines in the failing human heart:
SI, H TT, M H, E CJ, W
comparison of recent-onset and end-stage con-
DC. Mitochondrial disease in superoxide dismutase
gestive heart failure. J Heart Lung Transplant 2000;
2 mutant mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci 1999; 96: 846–
19: 819–824.
851.
202. Y P, M BM, S PC, L CS. Cytokine
194. S VG, G A, L M, G S,
expression increases in nonmyocytes from rats with
S HN. Abnormal mitochondrial function in
postinfatction heart failure. Am J Physiol 1998;
myocardium of dogs with chronic heart failure. J
275: H250–H258.
Mol Cell Cardiol 1998; 30: 1757–1762.
203. MT CF, F AM. The role of tumor
195. I T, T H, K S, U H, K D,
necrosis factor alpha in the pathophysiology of
H N, U K, A K,E
congestive heart failure. Curr Cardiol Rep 2000; 2:
K, T A. Mitochondrial electron transport
189–197.
complex I is a potential source of oxygen free
204. G TI, T KY, H CL. Direct inhibition
radicals in the failing myocardium. Circ Res 1999;
of mitochondrial respiratory chain complex III by
85: 357–363.
cell-permeable ceramide. J Biol Chem 1997; 272:
196. Q AF, K RM, E D, H G, B
24154–24158.
E. Mitochondrial respiratory chain activity in idio-
205. D E M, ML H. Mitochondria and
pathic dilated cardiomyopathy. J Card Fail 2000; 6:
cells produce reactive oxygen species in virtual
47–55.
anaerobiosis: relevance to ceramide-induced apo-
197. J D, O J, B A, M O, R E,
ptosis. FEBS Lett 1998; 430: 338–342.
H M, M CT, C F, C
206. R C, G P. Ceramide induces cyto-
J. Mitochondrial function in heart muscle from
chrome c release from isolated mitochondria. Bio-
patients with idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy.
chem Soc Symp 1999; 66: 27–31.
Cardiovasc Res 2000; 45: 860–865.
207. N J, P P, A E, H N, N-
198. M-G J, G MJ, P EM,
 N, K FD, D B B, S MJ,
A R, P-A A. Is age a
B-M A, D GW, I S, B
contributory factor of mitochondrial bioenergetic
M, V R, S S, K S. Apoptosis
decline and DNA defects in idiopathic dilated cardio- in heart failure: release of cytochrome c from mito-
myopathy? Cardiovasc Pathol 1999; 8: 217–222. chondria and activation of caspase-3 in human
199. B A, T H, U C, O cardiomyopathy. Proc Natl Acad Sci 1999; 96:
8144–8149.R, F HR, W V. Alterations of the
