HOT TOPICS
Some highlights of research on aging with
invertebrates, 2010
Linda Partridge
1,2
1
Max Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing, Gleueler Strasse 55a,
50931 Ko¨ ln, Germany
2
Institute for Healthy Ageing, UCL, Darwin Buidling, Gower St,
London WC1E 6BT, UK
Summary
This annual review focuses on invertebrate model organ-
isms, which continue to yield fundamental new insights
into mechanisms of aging. This year, the budding yeast
has been used to understand how asymmetrical partition-
ing of cellular constituents at cell division can produce a
rejuvenated offspring from an aging parent. Blocking of
sensation of carbon dioxide is shown to extend fly life-
spanandto mediatethelifespan-shortening effect ofsen-
sory exposure to fermenting yeast. A new study of
daf-16, the key forkhead transcription factor that medi-
ates extension of lifespan by mutants in the insulin-sig-
nalling pathway in Caenorhabditis elegans, demonstrates
that expression of tissue-specific isoforms with different
patterns of response to upstream signalling mediates the
highly pleiotropic effects of the pathway on lifespan and
other traits. A new approach to manipulating mitochon-
drial activity in Drosophila, by introducing the yeast
NADH-ubiquinone oxidoreductase, shows promise for
understanding the role of mitochondrial reactive oxygen
species in aging. An exciting new study of yeast and
mammalian cells implicates deterioration of the nuclear
pore, andconsequent leakage ofcytoplasmic components
into the nucleus, as an important cause of aging in post-
mitotic tissues. Loss of, or damage to, chromosome-asso-
ciated histones is also implicated in the determination of
lifespan in yeast, worms and fruit flies. The relationship
between functional aging, susceptibility to aging-related
disease and lifespan itself are explored in two studies in
C. elegans, the first examining the role of dietary restric-
tion and reduced insulin signalling in cognitive decline
and the second profiling aggregation of the proteome
during aging. The invertebrates continue to be a power
house of discovery for future work in mammals.
One of the most fascinating observations in biology is the pro-
duction of youthful offspring by aging parents. The mechanisms
by which this phenotypic rejuvenation can occur are being inves-
tigated in the single-celled, budding yeast Saccharomyces cere-
visiae. This organism has an asymmetrical mitotic division, in
which the larger mother cell shows progressive deterioration in
the capacity to bud while the smaller daughter cells are born
with full replicative potential. At least part of this asymmetry is
attributable to a mechanism of spatial quality control (SQC), in
which accumulated extrachromosomal rDNA circles (Sinclair &
Guarente, 1997) and oxidatively damaged proteins (Erjavec
et al., 2007) are selectively retained in the mother cell, a process
that requires both the sirtuin Sir2p, a protein deacetylase, and
the protein-aggregate remodelling factor Hsp104p (Erjavec
et al., 2007). A recent study (Liu et al., 2010) has investigated
mechanisms involved in SQC, using synthetic genetic array anal-
ysis, which screens for interactions between individually viable
mutations that result in synthetic lethality. Such an interaction
implies that the two gene products may affect the same process,
in this case SQC. A screen for interactions with a Sir2p null
mutation identified actin and the polarisome, a protein complex
that is involved in the organization of the actin cytoskeleton and
consequently required for polarized cell growth. These interac-
tions required the deacetylase activity of Sir2p, and cells lacking
Sir2p showed elevated acetylation of the chaperonin CCT,
reduced efficiency of actin folding by CCT and elevated levels of
non-native actin. Mutants in polarisome components and the
myosin V motor protein resulted in reduced efficiency of segre-
gation of protein aggregates and lowered replicative lifespan.
Cytoskeletal functions and polarity are thus crucial for the asym-
metrical segregation of damaged molecules. A second recent
study (Eldakak et al., 2010) has identified a new class of proteins
that are retained in the yeast mother cell and that appear to be
limiting for replicative lifespan, the MDR transporter proteins (so
named because they mediate multidrug resistance in some can-
cers). These proteins are found in the plasma membrane and
eject a variety of toxins from cells. At budding, the mother cell
retains its own pool of MDR proteins, while the daughter cell
inherits newly synthesized MDRs. Mild over-expression of sev-
eral of these MDRs increased replicative lifespan, implying that
their number or function may decline during aging and limit
lifespan.
Correspondence
Linda Partridge, Max Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing, Gleueler Strasse
55a, 50931 Ko¨ln, Germany. Tel.: 0049 221 478 89 692; fax: 0049 221 478
97 404; e-mail: l.partridge@ucl.ac.uk
Accepted for publication 20 October 2010
Re-use of this article is permitted in accordance with the Terms and Conditions
set out at http://wileyonlinelibrary.com/onlineopen#OnlineOpen_Terms
ª 2010 The Author
Aging Cell ª 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd/Anatomical Society of Great Britain and Ireland
5
Aging Cell (2011) 10, pp5–9 Doi: 10.1111/j.1474-9726.2010.00649.x
Aging
 
Cell
One unresolved paradox is why loss of asymmetric segrega-
tion of damaging molecules in budding yeast leads to shortened
replicative lifespan of the bud. Normally, the daughter cell is
generated in a youthful state, presumably because the mother
retains damaging agents during division. Following this logic, if
asymmetry is lost in the absence of altered rates of damage
repair, the daughter would inherit more damage at birth but
would also retain less damage during subsequent divisions as a
mother cell. The observation that lifespan is reduced in cells los-
ing asymmetry may imply that damage inherited in the daughter
is more highly detrimental than that accumulating in the
mother, perhaps because mothers are more equipped to deal
with damage or because impaired asymmetry also leads to
impaired repair. These issues remain to be resolved. It will also
be important to establish whether these mechanisms of SQC
through retention of damaged molecules in the parent by cyto-
skeletal and polarity function are important in the germ lines
and stem cells of multicellular organisms and, if so, to identify
the classes of molecules that are affected.
Dietary restriction (DR) can extend lifespan in numerous
organisms and can also ameliorate aging-related loss of func-
tion and pathology (Mair & Dillin, 2008; Fontana et al., 2010).
Dietary restriction in the laboratory model organisms can be
implemented using a variety of methods, and it is clear that
the mechanisms of lifespan extension can vary with the
method used. Although altered nutrition per se presumably
mediates the extension of lifespan in some cases, it is also
becoming apparent that chemosensation, without any change
in nutrient intake, can play an important role. For instance,
fruit flies subjected to DR show increased lifespan, but if they
are exposed to odours derived from live yeast, a standard food
source for Drosophila in the laboratory and in nature, then
some of the extension of lifespan by DR is lost (Libert et al.,
2007). Poon et al. (2010) now show that sensation of carbon
dioxide plays a key role in the response to live yeast. Flies
sense the gas using a specific subpopulation of neurons that
express two gustatory receptor genes. A null mutation in one
of these, Gr63a, abolishes the electrophysiological response of
the neurons to carbon dioxide, and it also extended the life-
span of female, but not male, flies by 30%. Lifespan was
extended mainly by reducing baseline mortality rate rather
than reducing the rate of increase with age, similar to the
effects of DR in Drosophila. The extension of lifespan was lost
if Gr63a was re-expressed in the neurons using a heterologous
expression system, and targeted ablation of the carbon-diox-
ide-sensing neurons also resulted in an increase in lifespan,
demonstrating robust causality. Whereas exposure to odorants
from live yeast generally shortened the lifespan of female (but
not male) control flies, the mutant Gr63a flies did not
respond, although flies mutant for a different olfactory
mutant, Orb83b, which are generally anosmic but retain the
ability to sense carbon dioxide, responded normally. Interest-
ingly, Gr63a null flies themselves responded normally to DR
imposed by dilution of a diet containing killed yeast and
sucrose (Poon et al., 2010), a standard method of DR in
Drosophila in many laboratories, which robustly increases life-
span in multiple strains of flies (Bass et al., 2007; Grandison
et al., 2009; Wong et al., 2009; Piper et al., 2010). These
results imply that chemosensation of the carbon dioxide from
fermentation by live yeast plays an important role in the
response of lifespan to this food source, but that other sys-
tems, possibly also involving chemosensation, mediate the
response of lifespan to killed yeast and ⁄ or sucrose. Chemosen-
sation of food can also shorten lifespan in worms subjected to
DR (Smith et al., 2008), and it would be interesting to know if
olfactory or gustatory mutant mice have longer lifespans or if
their lifespans respond differently to DR.
The insulin ⁄ Igf ⁄ TOR signalling network plays an evolutionarily
conserved role in the determination of lifespan in budding yeast,
the nematode worm Caenorhabditis elegans, the fruit fly
Drosophila melanogaster, the mouse and, possibly, humans
(Fontana et al., 2010; Kapahi et al., 2010; Kenyon, 2010). In the
worm, extension of lifespan by reduced activity of the upstream
pathway requires the forkhead transcription factor daf-16
(Kenyon et al., 1993). Much interest has therefore centred on
the roles of orthologous forkhead box O transcription factors in
other organisms, including humans (Greer & Brunet, 2008;
Partridge & Bruning, 2008; Greer et al., 2009), and in the mech-
anisms by which altered activity of daf-16 increases lifespan in
the worm. It now transpires that expression of two different,
tissue-specific splice variants of daf-16 are required for the full
extension of lifespan (Kwon et al., 2010). The worm has three
daf-16 isoforms, with two (a and b) discovered some time ago
and a third (d⁄ f) reported more recently. Some evidence sug-
gested that one of these isoforms, daf-16a, was particularly
important for the increased longevity of insulin pathway
mutants, which is lost in a daf-16 null background. However,
experiments where daf-16a alone was re-introduced to worms
double mutant for the insulin receptor daf-2 and for daf-16
resulted in incomplete rescue of the increased lifespan, leading
Kwon et al. to take a closer look at the situation. New isoform-
specific constructs for RNA interference were used to show that
the new daf-16 isoform, daf-16d⁄f, as well as daf-16a, was
involved in the extension of lifespan by a mutant insulin recep-
tor. This conclusion was further supported by rescue experi-
ments for the extended lifespan of an insulin receptor mutant in
a daf-16 null background, where both daf-16a and daf-16d⁄f
were required for full restoration of the lifespan extension, with
daf-16d⁄f playing the preponderant role. These two daf-16 iso-
forms have different patterns of tissue specificity, with daf-
16d⁄f particularly enriched in the intestine, a tissue already
known to be important for the action of daf-16 in the extension
of lifespan by reduced insulin signalling (Libina et al., 2003). Res-
cue experiments with the promoter regions of the daf-16 iso-
forms swapped indicated that the promoter region, and hence
the different patterns of tissue-specific expression, mediated the
differing effects on lifespan. The two isoforms also responded
differently to altered activity of the two upstream AKT kinases,
with daf-16d ⁄ f more strongly regulated by AKT-1. The differen-
tial inputs and tissue-specific expression of these daf-16
Some highlights of research on aging with invertebrates, L. Partridge
ª 2010 The Author
Aging Cell ª 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd/Anatomical Society of Great Britain and Ireland
6
isoforms may explain the highly pleiotropic effects of this path-
way, by allowing specific and spatially differentiated responses
to different inputs to insulin signalling, such as nutrition and
stress. Worms and flies have only a single gene encoding a fork-
head box 0 transcription factor, while mammals have several,
which may show similar patterns of differentiation in function to
the daf-16 isoforms.
Aging is accompanied by the accumulation of damage to mol-
ecules, cells, tissues and the whole system. At least some of this
damage is thought to be causal for loss of function during aging,
although an intriguing alternative perspective has been sug-
gested, based upon deleterious effects of TOR activity later in life
(Blagosklonny, 2010). Oxygen free radicals (Harman, 1956) have
occupied central stage in discussions of damage-induced aging,
although the oxidative damage theory has been undermined by
recent evidence, as described in last year’s Hot Topics (Partridge,
2009). Two studies with Drosophila have taken a novel
approach, with interesting, but somewhat conflicting, results.
Complex 1 of the mitochondrial electron transfer chain, NADH-
ubiquinone oxidoreductase, is strongly implicated in the produc-
tion of superoxide in mitochondria isolated from Drosophila and
rodents. Direct manipulation of the activities of this complex is
hampered by the fact that it consists of over 40 subunits that are
encoded by both the nuclear and the mitochondrial genomes.
However, the yeast NADH-ubiquinone oxidoreductase Ndi1 is
composed of a single, nuclear-encoded polypeptide. Two stud-
ies (Bahadorani et al., 2010; Sanz et al., 2010) have examined
the effects of introducing this yeast enzyme into Drosophila
mitochondria in vivo. When ubiquitously expressed, enzyme
activity, ATP levels and NAD
+
⁄ NADH ratio were all increased.
However, one study (Sanz et al., 2010) found reduced superox-
ide production from isolated mitochondria while the other (Bah-
adorani et al., 2010) found no change, possibly because
different respiratory substrates and methods of measurement
were used in the two studies. Ubiquitous expression extended
lifespan in one study (Sanz et al., 2010), but only neuronal
expression did so in the second (Bahadorani et al., 2010). These
somewhat inconsistent results could have been a consequence
of differences in expression level, and there are now fly stocks
that allow standardization of insertion site and expression level
of transgenes (Markstein et al., 2008). This approach to manipu-
lating mitochondrial activity is a promising one for understand-
ing effects of respiratory activity and oxygen free radicals on
aging.
Although molecular damage is a marked feature of the aging
process, damage at higher levels of organization may be equally
important in causing aging. A fascinating new study (D’Angelo
et al., 2009) has revealed a new type of damage that occurs at
the cellular level and that could play a key role in many postmi-
totic tissues. Nuclear pores are formed of complexes of nucleo-
porin proteins, which in dividing cells disassemble at mitosis and
reassemble into the newly forming nuclei. D’Angelo et al.
showed in C. elegans that expression of the genes encoding a
subset of scaffold nucleoporins is confined to dividing cells, with
scaffold proteins produced in the embryo showing life-long sta-
bility in the postmitotic cells of the adult worm. RNA interfer-
ence did not reduce the level of these scaffold nucleoporins in
adult somatic cells, nor did it reduce lifespan, even of long-lived
insulin receptor mutant worms. A similar down-regulation of
expression of scaffold nucleoporins at exit from the cell cycle,
and long-term stability of the proteins, was found in mouse
cells. Furthermore, these scaffold proteins showed very low
turnover compared with other components of the nuclear pore
and of the nuclear envelope, such as lamins. D’Angleo et al.
therefore assessed nuclear pore function during aging, by mea-
suring permeability to fluorescently labelled dextrans of a molec-
ular weight that would normally be excluded. Nuclei isolated
from old, but not young, worms and rat brains allowed passage
of these molecules, which was prevented by chemical blocking
of the nuclear pores. Nuclei from rat cells that failed to exclude
dextrans also showed leakage into the nucleus of normally
strictly cytoplasmic proteins such as tubulin, which aggregated
into large filamentous structures that caused severe chromatin
aberrations, and one of the scaffold nucleoporins, Nup93, was
lost from these nuclei. It would be interesting to know whether
interventions that extend lifespan, such as DR and reduced activ-
ity of the insulin ⁄ Igf ⁄ TOR network, tend to protect scaffold
nucleoporins and nuclear pore function during aging.
It is also noteworthy that mutations in LMNA cause Hutchin-
son–Gilford progeria syndrome (HGPS), a severe progeroid
disorder characterized by pathologies resembling premature
aging (Burtner & Kennedy, 2010). While it is unclear that the
molecular causes of HGPS overlap with those of normal aging, it
has been reported that A-type nuclear lamins, encoded by
LMNA and juxtaposed to the nuclear envelope, may regulate
nuclear pore function. Moreover, an altered form of lamin A
resembling the HGPS mutant is detectable in normal cells and
tissues and may increase with age, while defects in nuclear orga-
nization increase with age. More studies need to be conducted
to determine whether the LMNA mutants linked to progeria
affect the function of scaffold nucleoporins.
Another potentially widespread type of damage in the cell
nucleus during aging has been found in yeast, through loss of
chromatin-associated histones (Feser et al., 2010; McCormick &
Kennedy, 2010). Levels of histone proteins including histone H3
decline with age, and chromatin immunoprecipitation showed
less H3 associated with specific gene promoters, including pro-
moters that are normally both silent and active in aging yeast
cells. Tellingly, over-expression of histones led to increased repli-
cative lifespan. This result could imply that looser chromatin
packing, and hence elevated expression of many genes, contrib-
utes to aging or that histones become damaged during aging
and a higher level of histone proteins allows for more frequent
replacement. Loss of chromatin structure and de-repression of
gene expression could contribute to aging in multicellular organ-
isms, where transcriptional dysregulation during aging has been
reported. However, recent findings in the worm and the fly
appear at first sight mutually contradictory. A recent report
on C. elegans (Greer et al., 2010) showed that reduced
H3K4 trimethylation, which is usually characteristic of inactive
Some highlights of research on aging with invertebrates, L. Partridge
ª 2010 The Author
Aging Cell ª 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd/Anatomical Society of Great Britain and Ireland
7
chromatin, increased lifespan of the worm. However, another
recent study, in Drosophila, showed extended lifespan by
reduced chromatin silencing, through lowered trimethylation of
lysine 27 in histone H3 by the Polycomb Repressive Complex 2
(Siebold et al., 2010). These results could imply that the effects
of chromatin silencing on lifespan are opposite in worm and fly.
However, the fly study used heterozygous mutations, which can
be a problem in Drosophila because of the possibility of hetero-
sis. Nonetheless, it will be important to understand the exact
role of chromatin silencing in aging in these two invertebrates.
Aging is the major risk factor for the predominant killer
diseases in humans. Animal models of increased lifespan often
show evidence of improvement in function and reduction in
impact of aging-related diseases, implying that slowing aging
also ameliorates the diseases of aging. However, the correlation
between increased lifespan and specific improvements in func-
tion is not perfect (Partridge, 2010), and it is clear that some
models of increased lifespan are not associated with universally
improved function during aging (Bhandari et al., 2007) and can
even have negative side effects, such as reduced resistance to
infection (Clinthorne et al., 2010). It is therefore important to
understand the mechanisms linking improved function during
aging, resistance to aging-related disease and lifespan. Two
recent studies in C. elegans are illuminating. In the first, Kauff-
man et al. (2010) developed useful new paradigms to assess
associative learning and memory in the worm. During aging,
learning ability and long-term memory declined. Reduced insulin
signalling and DR both alleviated cognitive decline, but in subtly
different ways. A mutation in the insulin receptor daf-2
improved memory in young adults and maintained the ability to
learn during aging, but did not extend long-term memory with
age. In contrast, eat-2 mutants, which reduce pharyngeal
pumping and are a model of DR in C. elegans, impaired long-
term memory in young adults but maintained the memory for
longer into older age. The C. elegans homologue of the mam-
malian transcription factor CREB was required for long-term
memory. CREB expression declined with age and was higher in
young insulin receptor mutant worms and lower in young eat-2
worms and was maintained for longer with age in eat-2
mutants. The differing effects of these two mutants on long-
term memory thus corresponded with their differing effects on
expression of CREB. These findings point to the value of under-
standing the whole signalling network, to identify the modula-
tions that are likely to provide the maximum benefit to specific
aspects of aging-related decline.
Also searching for valid generalizations about aging as a risk
factor for disease, David et al. (2010) investigated protein
aggregation as part of the normal aging process in C. elegans.
Aggregated proteins are present in many neurodegenerative
and amyloid diseases, but their possible role in the normal aging
process has barely been investigated. David et al. found that a
significant fraction of the proteins in young worms were insolu-
ble in a strong detergent buffer, and that this fraction increased
over threefold with age. Some proteins showed no change in
insolubility with age and over-represented among these were
cytoskeletal proteins. A subset of 461 proteins showed evidence
of a repeatable increase in insolubility with age, which was not
associated with an increase in total levels of individual proteins.
Rather, those aggregation-prone proteins that were present
became more likely to be aggregated as the worms aged. These
proteins were enriched for b-sheets, already strongly implicated
in promoting protein aggregation, and for involvement in devel-
opmental processes, particularly proteostasis itself, including
components of the proteasome and chaperones. David et al.
went on to test the effect on age-related protein aggregation of
a mutant in the worm insulin receptor daf-2, already shown to
double lifespan and to delay proteotoxicity associated with
genetic models of polyglutamine and amyloid beta toxicity in
C. elegans. Although there was no detectable difference in pro-
tein aggregation in young animals, as they aged the daf-2
mutants showed no increase in protein aggregation with age,
and again measurement of the concentrations of specific pro-
teins showed no reduction in total protein present. Thus, in
worms, reduced activity of the insulin-signalling pathway may
exert a very general beneficial effect on the cellular environment
during aging, by reducing the propensity of aggregation-prone
proteins to form aggregates. Understanding exactly how this
occurs is an interesting future challenge.
These little invertebrates have, for another year, provided
many fascinating discoveries for future follow-up in mammals,
and they show no sign of losing their ability to provide novel bio-
logical insights into mechanisms of aging.
Acknowledgments
I thank Brian Kennedy for useful discussion and the Max Planck
Society and the Wellcome Trust for financial support.
References
Bahadorani S, Cho J, Lo T, Contreras H, Lawal HO, Krantz DE, Bradley
TJ, Walker DW (2010) Neuronal expression of a single-subunit yeast
NADH-ubiquinone oxidoreductase (Ndi1) extends Drosophila life-
span. Aging Cell 9, 191–202.
Bass TM, Grandison RC, Wong R, Martinez P, Partridge L, Piper MD
(2007) Optimization of dietary restriction protocols in Drosophila.
J. Gerontol. A Biol. Sci. Med. Sci. 62, 1071–1081.
Bhandari P, Jones MA, Martin I, Grotewiel MS (2007) Dietary restric-
tion alters demographic but not behavioral aging in Drosophila.
Aging Cell 6, 631–637.
Blagosklonny MV (2010) Revisiting the antagonistic pleiotropy theory
of aging: TOR-driven program and quasi-program. Cell Cycle 9,
3151–3156.
Burtner CR, Kennedy BK (2010) Progeria syndromes and ageing: what
is the connection? Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 11, 567–578.
Clinthorne JF, Adams DJ, Fenton JI, Ritz BW, Gardner EM (2010)
Short-term re-feeding of previously energy-restricted C57BL ⁄ 6 male
mice restores body weight and body fat and attenuates the decline
in natural killer cell function after primary influenza infection.
J. Nutr. 140, 1495–1501.
D’Angelo MA, Raices M, Panowski SH, Hetzer MW (2009) Age-depen-
dent deterioration of nuclear pore complexes causes a loss of
nuclear integrity in postmitotic cells. Cell 136, 284–295.
Some highlights of research on aging with invertebrates, L. Partridge
ª 2010 The Author
Aging Cell ª 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd/Anatomical Society of Great Britain and Ireland
8
David DC, Ollikainen N, Trinidad JC, Cary MP, Burlingame AL, Kenyon
C (2010) Widespread protein aggregation as an inherent part of
aging in C. elegans. PLoS Biol. 8, e1000450.
Eldakak A, Rancati G, Rubinstein B, Paul P, Conaway V, Li R (2010)
Asymmetrically inherited multidrug resistance transporters are
recessive determinants in cellular replicative ageing. Nat. Cell Biol.
12, 799–805.
Erjavec N, Larsson L, Grantham J, Nystrom T (2007) Accelerated aging
and failure to segregate damaged proteins in Sir2 mutants can be
suppressed by overproducing the protein aggregation-remodeling
factor Hsp104p. Genes Dev. 21, 2410–2421.
Feser J, Truong D, Das C, Carson JJ, Kieft J, Harkness T, Tyler JK
(2010) Elevated histone expression promotes life span extension.
Mol. Cell 39, 724–735.
Fontana L, Partridge L, Longo VD (2010) Extending healthy life span–
from yeast to humans. Science 328, 321–326.
Grandison RC, Wong R, Bass TM, Partridge L, Piper MD (2009) Effect
of a standardised dietary restriction protocol on multiple laboratory
strains of Drosophila melanogaster. PLoS ONE 4, e4067.
Greer EL, Brunet A (2008) FOXO transcription factors in ageing and
cancer. Acta Physiol (Oxf). 192, 19–28.
Greer EL, Banko MR, Brunet A (2009) AMP-activated protein kinase
and FoxO transcription factors in dietary restriction-induced longev-
ity. Ann. N Y Acad. Sci. 1170, 688–692.
Greer EL, Maures TJ, Hauswirth AG, Green EM, Leeman DS, Maro GS,
Han S, Banko MR, Gozani O, Brunet A (2010) Members of the
H3K4 trimethylation complex regulate lifespan in a germline-depen-
dent manner in C. elegans. Nature 466, 383–387.
Harman D (1956) Aging: a theory based on free radical and radiation
chemistry. J. Gerontol. 11, 298–300.
Kapahi P, Chen D, Rogers AN, Katewa SD, Li PW, Thomas EL, Kockel
L (2010) With TOR, less is more: a key role for the conserved nutri-
ent-sensing TOR pathway in aging. Cell Metab. 11, 453–465.
Kauffman AL, Ashraf JM, Corces-Zimmerman MR, Landis JN, Murphy
CT (2010) Insulin signaling and dietary restriction differentially influ-
ence the decline of learning and memory with age. PLoS Biol. 8,
e1000372.
Kenyon CJ (2010) The genetics of ageing. Nature 464, 504–512.
Kenyon C, Chang J, Gensch E, Rudner A, Tabtiang R (1993) A
C. elegans mutant that lives twice as long as wild type. Nature 366,
461–464.
Kwon ES, Narasimhan SD, Yen K, Tissenbaum HA (2010) A new DAF-
16 isoform regulates longevity. Nature 466, 498–502.
Libert S, Zwiener J, Chu X, Vanvoorhies W, Roman G, Pletcher SD
(2007) Regulation of Drosophila life span by olfaction and food-
derived odors. Science 315, 1133–1137.
Libina N, Berman JR, Kenyon C (2003) Tissue-specific activities of
C. elegans DAF-16 in the regulation of lifespan. Cell 115, 489–502.
Liu B, Larsson L, Caballero A, Hao X, Oling D, Grantham J, Nystrom T
(2010) The polarisome is required for segregation and retrograde
transport of protein aggregates. Cell 140, 257–267.
Mair W, Dillin A (2008) Aging and survival: the genetics of life span
extension by dietary restriction. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 77, 727–
754.
Markstein M, Pitsouli C, Villalta C, Celniker SE, Perrimon N (2008)
Exploiting position effects and the gypsy retrovirus insulator to
engineer precisely expressed transgenes. Nat. Genet. 40, 476–
483.
McCormick MA, Kennedy BK (2010) Old yeast can’t handle the noise.
Mol. Cell 39, 659–661.
Partridge L (2009) Some highlights of research on aging with inverte-
brates, 2009. Aging Cell 8, 509–513.
Partridge L (2010) The new biology of ageing. Philos. Trans. R. Soc.
Lond., B, Biol. Sci. 365, 147–154.
Partridge L, Bruning JC (2008) Forkhead transcription factors and age-
ing. Oncogene 27, 2351–2363.
Piper MD, Wong R, Grandison RC, Bass TM, Martinez PM, Partridge
L (2010) Water-independent effects of dietary restriction in Dro-
sophila. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 107, E54–E56. author reply
E57.
Poon PC, Kuo TH, Linford NJ, Roman G, Pletcher SD (2010) Carbon
dioxide sensing modulates lifespan and physiology in Drosophila.
PLoS Biol. 8, e1000356.
Sanz A, Soikkeli M, Portero-Otin M, Wilson A, Kemppainen E, McIlroy
G, Ellila S, Kemppainen KK, Tuomela T, Lakanmaa M, Kiviranta E,
Stefanatos R, Dufour E, Hutz B, Naudi A, Jove M, Zeb A, Vartiainen
S, Matsuno-Yagi A, Yagi T, Rustin P, Pamplona R, Jacobs HT (2010)
Expression of the yeast NADH dehydrogenase Ndi1 in Drosophila
confers increased lifespan independently of dietary restriction. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 107, 9105–9110.
Siebold AP, Banerjee R, Tie F, Kiss DL, Moskowitz J, Harte PJ (2010)
Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 and Trithorax modulate Drosophila
longevity and stress resistance. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 107, 169–
174.
Sinclair DA, Guarente L (1997) Extrachromosomal rDNA circles – a
cause of aging in yeast. Cell 91, 1033–1042.
Smith ED, Kaeberlein TL, Lydum BT, Sager J, Welton KL, Kennedy BK,
Kaeberlein M (2008) Age- and calorie-independent life span exten-
sion from dietary restriction by bacterial deprivation in Caenorhabd-
itis elegans. BMC Dev. Biol. 8, 49.
Wong R, Piper MD, Wertheim B, Partridge L (2009) Quantification of
food intake in Drosophila. PLoS ONE 4, e6063.
Some highlights of research on aging with invertebrates, L. Partridge
ª 2010 The Author
Aging Cell ª 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd/Anatomical Society of Great Britain and Ireland
9
