 http://nro.sagepub.com/
 
The Neuroscientist
 http://nro.sagepub.com/content/8/3/192
The online version of this article can be found at:
 
DOI: 10.1177/1073858402008003004
 2002 8: 192Neuroscientist
Todd B. Sherer, Ranjita Betarbet and J. Timothy Greenamyre
Environment, Mitochondria, and Parkinson's Disease
 
 
Published by:
 http://www.sagepublications.com
 can be found at:The NeuroscientistAdditional services and information for 
 
 
 
 
 
 http://nro.sagepub.com/cgi/alertsEmail Alerts: 
 
 http://nro.sagepub.com/subscriptionsSubscriptions:  
 http://www.sagepub.com/journalsReprints.navReprints: 
 
 http://www.sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.navPermissions: 
 
 http://nro.sagepub.com/content/8/3/192.refs.htmlCitations: 
 
 at Univ of Newcastle upon Tyne on November 23, 2010nro.sagepub.comDownloaded from 
192 THE NEUROSCIENTIST Environment, Mitochondria, and Parkinson’s Disease
Copyright © 2002 Sage Publications
ISSN 1073-8584
Parkinson’s disease (PD) is a late-
onset neurodegenerative disease,
characterized clinically by tremor,
rigidity, and bradykinesia (slowness
of movement). Additional signs and
symptoms may include gait and bal-
ance difficulties and autonomic dys-
function. About one-third of people
with PD develop dementia. Aging is
a major risk factor for PD; it is
uncommon before age 40, but its
incidence increases progressively
thereafter.
Pathologically, PD is marked by
progressive, selective degeneration
of the nigrostriatal dopaminergic
pathway. Although there is some
involvement of other dopaminergic
cell groups, such as the ventral
tegmental area, and other cate-
cholamine-containing cells, such as
the locus ceruleus, the cells of the
substantia nigra pars compacta bear
the brunt of the damage in PD. It is
not clear whether degeneration
begins in the nerve terminals or the
cell bodies of these neurons. Many
degenerating dopaminergic cells
contain round, cytoplasmic inclu-
sions called Lewy bodies (Mirra and
others 1997). By electron micro-
scopy, these inclusions have a dense
amorphous core surrounded by fila-
mentous material. Lewy bodies con-
tain the widely expressed synaptic
protein, α-synuclein, and polyubiq-
uitin (Mirra and others 1997;
Spillantini and others 1997).
The role of genetics in typical PD
is a matter of debate. Rarely, patients
have a familial form of PD, usually
with an earlier disease onset and
often with atypical clinical features.
Such familial cases of PD have been
associated with mutations in proteins
such as α-synuclein and parkin
(Polymeropoulos and others 1997;
Kitada and others 1998). However,
most cases of typical PD (sporadic
PD) are characterized by little, if
any, family history, and disease onset
late in life. Although the causes of
sporadic PD are unknown, it is wide-
ly believed that a combination of
genetic susceptibilities and environ-
mental exposures account for most
cases. Despite this widespread
belief, the specific genetic and envi-
ronmental factors important in PD
remain elusive.
Environment and PD
Numerous epidemiological studies
have been performed in an attempt to
define factors associated with an
increased risk of developing PD.
Although no specific causative
smoking gun has been identified
definitively, there are intriguing
clues. For example, case-control
studies have suggested that i) rural
living, ii) farming as an occupation,
iii) drinking well water, and iv) pesti-
cide exposure are each associated
with an increased risk of PD.
Although not all studies have been
positive, recent meta-analyses have
indicated that the risks associated
with these factors are likely to be real
(Priyadarshi and others 2000, 2001).
The extent to which these factors are
related or independent is not clear,
however. An additional environmen-
tal risk for PD is occupational expo-
sure to certain metals, most notably
manganese (Gorell and others 1999).
Interestingly, many pesticides and
manganese share the common mech-
anism of causing mitochondrial dys-
function. Such mechanistic com-
monalities may eventually provide
insights into PD pathogenesis.
Unfortunately, with the exception
of 1-methyl-4-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropy-
ridine (MPTP), which will be dis-
cussed below, no specific environ-
mental agent has been linked conclu-
sively to PD pathogenesis. There are
several possible explanations for
this. First, chronic low-level environ-
mental exposures may be more rele-
vant to sporadic PD but may be very
Environment, Mitochondria, and
Parkinson’s Disease
TODD B. SHERER, RANJITA BETARBET, and J. TIMOTHY GREENAMYRE
Department of Neurology
Emory University
Atlanta, Georgia
Parkinson’s disease (PD) is a common and disabling neurodegenera-
tive disease marked by progressive motor dysfunction, which results
from selective degeneration of the nigrostriatal pathway. Epidemio-
logical studies indicate that exposure to pesticides, rural living, farm-
ing, and drinking well water are associated with an increased risk of
developing PD. Rare cases of PD are caused by mutations in nuclear
genes, and there is increasing evidence for susceptibility genes that
alter disease risk. Parkinson’s disease is also associated with a sys-
temic defect in mitochondrial complex I activity. Animal models indi-
cate that exposure to inhibitors of mitochondrial complex I, including
pesticides, is sufficient to reproduce the features of PD, but genetic
factors clearly modulate susceptibility. Complex I defects may result
in oxidative stress and increase the susceptibility of neurons to exci-
totoxic death. In this way, environmental exposures and mitochondri-
al dysfunction may interact and result in neurodegeneration. NEURO-
SCIENTIST 8(3):192–197, 2002
KEY WORDS Neurodegeneration, Oxidative stress, Excitotoxicity, Pesticides
g110 NEUROSCIENCE UPDATE
This work was supported by NS38399,
NS33779, and AG14648.
Address correspondence to: J. Timothy
Greenamyre, Department of Neurology,
Emory University, 1639 Pierce Drive, WMB
Room 6331, Atlanta, GA 30322 (e-mail:
jgreena@emory.edu).
 at Univ of Newcastle upon Tyne on November 23, 2010nro.sagepub.comDownloaded from 
Volume 8, Number 3, 2002 THE NEUROSCIENTIST 193
difficult to detect. Second, acute
environmental exposures may pro-
duce delayed or slowly progressive
degeneration, so that the disease
expression (symptom onset) might
be remote in time and place from
exposure. Indeed, imaging and post-
mortem studies suggest that expo-
sure to MPTP in the remote past may
cause a progressive parkinsonian dis-
order (Vingerhoets and others 1994;
Langston and others 1999). Third,
individual genetic variations may
explain the development of PD only
in a subset of individuals exposed to
similar toxins. Such genetic variation
could involve polymorphic varia-
tions in disease-associated genes,
such as α-synuclein (Farrer and oth-
ers 2001), xenobiotic metabolism
(Menegon and others 1998), mito-
chondrial function (Schapira 1998),
or even blood-brain-barrier function.
Environment, Mitochondria,
and PD
In 1982, the product of a botched
meperidine synthesis, MPTP, was
injected inadvertently by several
drug addicts in the San Francisco bay
area. This unfortunate event provided
direct evidence for the potential role
of “environmental” toxins in PD
pathogenesis: MPTP caused an acute
and permanent parkinsonian syn-
drome in these individuals (Langston
and others 1983). Investigations of
the mechanisms through which
MPTP exposure resulted in selective
dopaminergic cell death have
uncovered clues to PD pathogenesis.
1-Methyl-4-phenylpyridinium ion
(MPP
+
), the active metabolite of
MPTP, is a substrate for the dopa-
mine transporter, which is selectively
expressed in dopaminergic neurons
(Javitch and Snyder 1984). Once
inside these neurons, MPP
+
accumu-
lates in mitochondria and exerts its
toxicity by inhibiting complex I (Fig.
1) of the mitochondrial electron
transport chain (Nicklas and others
1985). Importantly, this finding sug-
gested that mitochondrial dysfunc-
tion may have a role in PD pathogen-
esis. Thus, the epidemiological study
that led to the identification of
MPTP ultimately suggested a patho-
genic mechanism.
With an understanding of the
mechanism of action of MPTP, sev-
eral laboratories began to investigate
the status of mitochondrial complex I
in sporadic PD. These studies
demonstrated that PD patients
express modest, but reproducible,
reductions in complex I activity in
tissues including brain and platelets
(Mizuno and others 1989; Parker and
others 1989; Schapira and others
1989). On average, in platelets, there
appears to be about a 25% decrease
in complex I activity, but current
complex I assays are insensitive to
subtle defects (Greenamyre and oth-
ers 2001). Thus, these results suggest
that PD patients have a systemic
complex I defect, affecting both
brain and peripheral tissues.
The use of cytoplasmic hybrid
(cybrid) cells has suggested that PD
patients may harbor mutations in
mitochondrially encoded subunits of
complex I. Cybrids are created when
cells devoid of mtDNA (due to long-
term, low-dose exposure to ethidium
bromide) are repopulated with
mtDNA from platelets of PD patients.
These cybrids express mtDNA from
PD patients, or age-matched con-
trols, on a uniform nuclear back-
ground. This technique has demon-
strated that the reduced complex I
activity seen in PD platelets can be
transmitted stably into cybrid cell
lines, which suggests that it may
result from mutations in mtDNA (Gu
and others 1998; Swerdlow and oth-
ers 1996). On the other hand, despite
intensive efforts, no causative
mtDNA mutations have been demon-
strated unambiguously.
In summary, PD is associated with
a modest, systemic defect in com-
plex I activity, which may result from
genetic or acquired alterations in
mitochondrial protein subunits, or
environmental exposures that inhibit
complex I function (Schapira 1998;
Le Couteur and others 1999). Whether
or not this complex I abnormality
had anything to do with PD patho-
genesis, however, remained uncertain.
That is, could a mild, systemic mito-
chondrial defect cause such exquis-
itely selective neurodegeneration?
Rotenone—Proof of Principle
To address this question, we used
rotenone to cause moderate, sys-
temic complex I inhibition in rats
(Betarbet and others 2000). Rotenone,
a naturally occurring compound, is a
potent inhibitor of complex I, and it
is typically used to define the specif-
ic activity of the enzyme complex. It
is also a commonly used pesticide in
vegetable gardens and it is used to
Fig. 1. Schematic diagram of the mitochondrial electron transport chain. The electron
transport chain consists of five enzyme complexes that create a proton gradient and
undergo oxidation-reduction reactions. This proton gradient is used to synthesize ATP.
Rotenone and MPP
+
act by inhibiting complex I.
 at Univ of Newcastle upon Tyne on November 23, 2010nro.sagepub.comDownloaded from 
194 THE NEUROSCIENTIST Environment, Mitochondria, and Parkinson’s Disease
kill nuisance fish in lakes and reser-
voirs. Rotenone is highly lipophilic
and easily crosses the blood-brain
barrier, and unlike MPP
+
, it does not
depend on the dopamine transporter
for access to cells.
After administration, rotenone
quickly enters the brain (Talpade and
others 2000) and causes uniform
complex I inhibition throughout the
brain (Betarbet and others 2000).
Despite this uniform inhibition of
complex I, rotenone exposure result-
ed, over a period of weeks, in highly
selective nigrostriatal dopaminergic
degeneration, which was virtually
identical to that in PD. Additionally,
rotenone exposure caused the forma-
tion of large cytoplasmic inclusions
in nigral neurons. These inclusions
contained α-synuclein and ubiquitin,
and by electron microscopy were
reminiscent of Lewy bodies. Behav-
iorally, the animals developed brady-
kinesia, rigidity, and gait problems
similar to PD. More severely affected
rats had motor “freezing” and flexed
posture. Thus, moderate systemic
inhibition of complex I was suffi-
cient to reproduce the features of PD
(Betarbet and others 2000).
These results have important
implications. First, they provide
direct experimental evidence that a
modest, systemic defect in complex I
can cause parkinsonism. Second,
they show that substantia nigra
dopamine neurons have an intrinsic
sensitivity to complex I defects.
Despite the fact that complex I was
uniformly inhibited throughout the
brain, only the substantia nigra neu-
rons degenerated. Third, they give
“biological plausibility” to the pesti-
cide/environmental exposure hypoth-
esis of PD.
Complex I and Mechanisms 
of Neurodegeneration
The mechanisms by which complex I
dysfunction leads to selective neu-
rodegeneration in PD remain to be
fully elucidated. Nevertheless, it is
clear that reduced complex I activity
may predispose to excitotoxicity and
oxidative damage, both of which
have been implicated in PD (Fig. 2).
Complex I dysfunction may ren-
der neurons vulnerable to excitotoxic
death by altering ATP levels, by
impairing Ca
++
homeostasis, or both.
Neurons rely almost exclusively on
mitochondrial respiration for pro-
duction of ATP, and ATP levels play
an important role in regulating cellu-
lar homeostasis. For example,
reduced ATP levels decrease the
activity of the plasma membrane
Na
+
/K
+
ATPase, resulting in partial
neuronal depolarization. Neuronal
depolarization decreases the voltage-
dependent Mg
++
blockade of the N-
methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) gluta-
mate receptor. Under these condi-
tions, even normal levels of extracel-
lular glutamate may cause excitotox-
ic activation of NMDA receptors and
elevation of intracellular Ca
++
. The
magnitude and duration of these Ca
++
transients may be further elevated by
reduced Ca
++
-ATPase activity due to
energy depletion and failure of mito-
chondrial calcium uptake, both as a
result of mitochondrial dysfunction.
Moreover, chronic complex I defects
have been shown to disrupt normal
Ca
++
signaling in neural cells (Sherer
and others 2001b). Thus, complex I
impairment may lead to abnormal
NMDA receptor activation and, at
the same time, render neurons more
vulnerable to this insult (Greene and
Greenamyre 1996).
An increased sensitivity to excito-
toxicity may be particularly detri-
mental in PD. With degeneration of
the nigrostriatal dopaminergic nerve
terminals, neurons of the subthalam-
ic nucleus become overactive
(Bergman and others 1990). These
cells are excitatory and glutamater-
gic, and among their targets is sub-
stantia nigra pars compacta. Thus, in
the setting of “sick” dopaminergic
neurons in PD, there is increased glu-
tamatergic input from the subthalam-
ic nucleus back onto those neurons.
It has been suggested that this may
lead to excitotoxicity in the substan-
tia nigra (Rodriguez and others
1998). Indeed, we have shown that
pharmacological reduction of sub-
thalamic activity reduces chronic
degeneration of dopaminergic neu-
rons in a rat model of PD (Blandini
and others 2001).
Impairment of complex I may also
cause oxidative stress, and there is
growing evidence to suggest a role
for oxidative damage in PD patho-
genesis. Brains from PD patients
express elevated markers of oxida-
tive damage including lipid peroxi-
Fig. 2. Mitochondrial dysfunction leads to oxidative stress and renders cells vulnerable
to excitotoxic insults. Mitochondrial defects result in increased production of reactive
oxygen species (ROS) that consume antioxidants such as glutathione, and cause dam-
age to DNA, protein, and lipids. Complex I dysfunction can also cause altered calcium
homeostasis. Additionally, reduced complex I function may cause a drop in ATP pro-
duction that could decrease the activity of ATPases, such as the Na
+
/K
+
ATPase, result-
ing in neuronal depolarization. Under these conditions, neurons are extremely suscep-
tible to excitotoxic insults.
 at Univ of Newcastle upon Tyne on November 23, 2010nro.sagepub.comDownloaded from 
Volume 8, Number 3, 2002 THE NEUROSCIENTIST 195
dation and oxidative modifications
to proteins and DNA (Dexter and
others 1989; Alam and others 1997a,
1997b). The source of this oxidative
damage is unknown, but dopamine
neurons are believed to exist in a
constant state of oxidative stress. The
activities of tyrosine hydroxylase, the
rate-limiting enzyme of dopamine
synthesis, and monoamine oxidase,
which catabolizes dopamine, cause
the formation of H
2
O
2
as a normal
by-product. Auto-oxidation of dopa-
mine, which leads to the production
of melanin in substantia nigra, also
yields H
2
O
2
, which decomposes to
•OH (hydroxyl radical), the most
reactive of the reactive oxygen
species (ROS). This nonenzymatic
reaction is accelerated in the pres-
ence of iron (particularly when it is
in the free, ferrous form, Fe
++
), which
is abundant physiologically in the
substantia nigra. In addition, small
amounts of highly reactive free radi-
cals are normally created as a by-
product of oxidative phosphoryla-
tion, but these are normally handled
efficiently by endogenous antioxi-
dant systems. However, partial inhi-
bition of complex I, as produced by
rotenone, MPP
+
, or observed in PD
patients, markedly enhances ROS
production (Hensley and others 1998;
Hasegawa and others 1990). A dan-
gerous feed-forward cycle may be
created in which local ROS produc-
tion can further damage complex I,
causing additional complex I dysfunc-
tion and increased ROS production.
Animal models have also pointed
toward a role for oxidative stress in
PD. Mice exposed to MPTP express
elevated levels of ROS and lipid per-
oxidation (Sriram and others 1997).
Antioxidants and spin trap agents
reduce MPTP-induced neurodegen-
eration (Matthews and others 1999).
Systemic rotenone-infusion induced
selective protein oxidation in the rat
striatum (Sherer and others 2001a).
In an in vitro system, chronic low-
dose rotenone causes progressive
depletion of glutathione, oxidative
damage to proteins and DNA, release
of cytochrome c from mitochondria
to cytosol, activation of caspase 3,
mitochondrial depolarization, and
eventually, apoptosis (Betarbet and
others 2001).
A link also exists between oxida-
tive stress and the formation of cyto-
plasmic inclusions. Oxidatively
modified α-synuclein is more prone
to degradation and aggregation than
native protein (Souza and others
2000). Additionally, α-synuclein
appears to be selectively nitrated in
PD (Giasson and others 2000). It is
also important to note that the com-
plex I toxins, MPTP (Vila and others
2000) and rotenone (Sherer, Betarbet,
and Greenamyre, unpublished results),
cause an apparent up-regulation of
α-synuclein levels. Together, these
results suggest an important role for
oxidative stress in PD, and altered
complex I function likely contributes
to this oxidative burden.
Complex I Inhibitors 
in the Environment
Studies with rotenone have demon-
strated that a mild systemic complex I
defect can accurately model PD.
Although it is a pesticide, however,
rotenone is unlikely to be a major
cause of PD. It has poor oral
bioavailability and it is reported to
undergo rapid biodegradation in the
environment. Moreover, it is not used
widely in commercial agriculture. In
contrast, there are many other pesti-
cides that are known to inhibit com-
plex I (Table 1) and that are used on
a much broader scale than rotenone
in commercial agriculture (Degli
Esposti 1998; Lümmen 1998).
Whether these compounds are also
capable of causing parkinsonism is
unknown and should be investigated.
There is uncertainty about
whether PD is a disease of the
“industrial age” and whether its inci-
dence is increasing. Nevertheless, it
is clear that PD has existed since
before there was widespread use of
pesticides or other synthetic com-
pounds. Therefore, it is essential to
consider natural compounds in our
environment, which might be capa-
ble of causing PD. In this regard, it is
interesting to note that there are
many natural substances that potent-
ly inhibit complex I (Table 2). Of
these, some are substantially more
potent than rotenone. It seems likely
that there are many other as yet
undiscovered compounds that also
inhibit complex I.
The extent to which complex I
inhibitors, natural or manmade, con-
taminate our food, water, or air is
largely unknown, but this may be a
determinant of PD risk. On the other
hand, differences in genetic suscepti-
bilities may play a major role in
whether or not an individual devel-
ops PD. Similarly, there are clear-cut
but poorly characterized genetic dif-
ferences in susceptibility to complex I
inhibitors in rodents. For example,
strains of mice vary enormously in
Table 1. Pesticides Known to Inhibit Complex I
Benzimidazole Hoe 110779
Bullatacin Pyridaben
6-Chloro-benzothiadiazole Pyrimidifen
Cyhalothrin Sandoz 548A
Fenazaquin Tebufenpyrad
Fenpyroximate Thiangazole
From Degli Esposti (1998) and Lümmen (1998).
Table 2. Natural Compounds Known to Inhibit Complex I
Compound Source
Rotenoids Leguminosae plants
Piericidins* Streptomyces strains
Acetogenins* Annonacae plants (custard apple, paw-paw)
Antibiotics Myxobacteria
Rhein Rhubarb
*More potent than rotenone. From Degli Esposti (1998).
 at Univ of Newcastle upon Tyne on November 23, 2010nro.sagepub.comDownloaded from 
196 THE NEUROSCIENTIST Environment, Mitochondria, and Parkinson’s Disease
their sensitivity to MPTP. In addi-
tion, changing from an outbred to an
inbred strain of rats greatly reduced
the variability in rotenone-induced
parkinsonism (Betarbet and others
2000). Thus, there is little doubt that
development of PD is a complex
interaction of normal aging, genetic
susceptibilities, and environment.
Conclusions
The etiology of PD is incompletely
understood. Epidemiological studies
and experimental models have sug-
gested a role for both environmental
exposures and genetic variability in
PD pathogenesis. Complex I abnor-
malities, due to genetic mutations or
polymorphisms, or to manmade or
natural substances, may play a piv-
otal role in the pathogenesis of PD by
elevating oxidative stress and render-
ing cells vulnerable to excitotoxic
insults (Fig. 3). An improved under-
standing of the involvement of envi-
ronmental exposures and mitochon-
drial defects in PD may ultimately
provide a means to prevent PD in
susceptible individuals and to slow
progression with neuroprotective
strategies.
References
Alam ZI, Daniel SE, Lees AJ, Marsden DC,
Jenner P, Halliwell B. 1997a. A gener-
alised increase in protein carbonyls in the
brain in Parkinson’s but not incidental
Lewy body disease. J Neurochem
69:1326–9.
Alam ZI, Jenner A, Daniel SE, Lees AJ,
Cairns N, Marsden CD, and others. 1997b.
Oxidative DNA damage in the parkinson-
ian brain: an apparent selective increase in
8-hydroxyguanine levels in substantia
nigra. J Neurochem 69:1196–203.
Bergman H, Wichmann T, DeLong MR. 1990.
Reversal of experimental parkinsonism by
lesions of the subthalamic nucleus.
Science 249:1436–8.
Betarbet R, Sherer TB, Lund S, Greenamyre
JT. 2001. The rotenone model of
Parkinson’s disease in vitro: progressive
oxidative damage, caspase-3 activation
and apoptosis. Soc Neurosci Abstr No.
653.1.
Betarbet R, Sherer TB, MacKenzie G, Garcia-
Osuna M, Panov AV, Greenamyre JT.
2000. Chronic systemic pesticide exposure
reproduces features of Parkinson’s disease.
Nat Neurosci 3:1301–6.
Blandini F, Nappi G, Greenamyre JT. 2001.
Subthalamic infusion of an NMDA antag-
onist prevents basal ganglia metabolic
changes and nigral degeneration in a
rodent model of Parkinson’s disease. Ann
Neurol 49:525–9.
Degli Esposti M. 1998. Inhibitors of NADH-
ubiquinone reductase: an overview.
Biochim Biophys Acta 1364:222–35.
Dexter DT, Carter CJ, Wells FR, Javoy-Agid F,
Agid Y, Lees A, and others. 1989. Basal
lipid peroxidation in substantia nigra is
increased in Parkinson’s disease. J
Neurochem 52:381–9.
Farrer M, Maraganore DM, Lockhart P,
Singleton A, Lesnick TG, de Andrade M,
and others. 2001. Alpha-synuclein gene
haplotypes are associated with Parkinson’s
disease. Hum Mol Genet 10:1847–51.
Giasson BI, Duda JE, Murray IV, Chen Q,
Souza JM, Hurtig HI, and others. 2000.
Oxidative damage linked to neurodegener-
ation by selective alpha-synuclein nitra-
tion in synucleinopathy lesions. Science
290:985–9.
Gorell JM, Johnson CC, Rybicki BA, Peterson
EL, Kortsha GX, Brown GG, and others.
1999. Occupational exposure to man-
ganese, copper, lead, iron, mercury and
zinc and the risk of Parkinson’s disease.
Neurotoxicology 20:239–47.
Greenamyre JT, Betarbet R, Sherer T, Panov
A. 2001. Response: Parkinson’s disease,
pesticides and mitochondrial dysfunction.
Trends Neurosci 24:247.
Greene JG, Greenamyre JT. 1996. Bioener-
getics and glutamate excitotoxicity. Prog
Neurobiol 48:613–34.
Gu M, Cooper JM, Taanman JW, Schapira
AH. 1998. Mitochondrial DNA transmis-
sion of the mitochondrial defect in
Parkinson’s disease. Ann Neurol 44:177–
86.
Hasegawa E, Takeshige K, Oishi T, Murai Y,
Minakami S. 1990. 1-Methyl-4-phenylpyri-
dinium (MPP+) induces NADH-depend-
ent superoxide formation and enhances
NADH-dependent lipid peroxidation in
bovine heart submitochondrial particles.
Biochem Biophys Res Commun
170:1049–55.
Hensley K, Pye QN, Maidt ML, Stewart CA,
Robinson KA, Jaffrey F, and others. 1998.
Interaction of alpha-phenyl-N-tert-butyl
nitrone and alternative electron acceptors
with complex I indicates a substrate reduc-
tion site upstream from the rotenone bind-
ing site. J Neurochem 71:2549–57.
Javitch JA, Snyder SH. 1984. Uptake of
MPP(+) by dopamine neurons explains
selectivity of parkinsonism-inducing neu-
rotoxin, MPTP. Eur J Pharmacol
106:455–6.
Kitada T, Asakawa S, Hattori N, Matsumine H,
Yamamura Y, Minoshima S, and others.
1998. Mutations in the parkin gene cause
autosomal recessive juvenile parkinson-
ism. Nature 392:605–8.
Langston JW, Ballard P, Tetrud JW, Irwin I.
1983. Chronic Parkinsonism in humans
due to a product of meperidine-analog
synthesis. Science 219:979–80.
Langston JW, Forno LS, Tetrud J, Reeves
AG, Kaplan JA, Karluk D. 1999.
Evidence of active nerve cell degeneration
in the substantia nigra of humans years
after 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahy-
dropyridine exposure. Ann Neurol
46:598–605.
Le Couteur DG, McLean AJ, Taylor MC,
Woodham BL, Board PG. 1999. Pesticides
and Parkinson’s disease. Biomed
Pharmacother 53:122–30.
Lümmen P. 1998. Complex I inhibitors as
insecticides and acaricides. Biochim
Biophys Acta 1364:287–96.
Fig. 3. Involvement of environmental exposures and genetics in Parkinson’s disease
(PD) pathogenesis. The etiology of PD may result from environmental exposures and/or
genetic mutations. Environmental toxins may include pesticides and/or herbicides.
Genetic alterations may involve mutations in α-synuclein or parkin genes or alterations
in mitochondrial DNA. Additionally, individual genetic variations may impact xenobiotic
metabolism. Environmental toxins may directly or indirectly, through influence on genet-
ic factors, lead to PD pathogenesis. Both environmental exposures and genetic muta-
tions may also cause mitochondrial dysfunction resulting in PD.
 at Univ of Newcastle upon Tyne on November 23, 2010nro.sagepub.comDownloaded from 
Volume 8, Number 3, 2002 THE NEUROSCIENTIST 197
Matthews RT, Klivenyi P, Mueller G, Yang L,
Wermer M, Thomas CE, and others. 1999.
Novel free radical spin traps protect
against malonate and MPTP neurotoxicity.
Exp Neurol 157:120–6.
Menegon A, Board PG, Blackburn AC,
Mellick GD, Le Couteur DG. 1998.
Parkinson’s disease, pesticides, and glu-
tathione transferase polymorphisms.
Lancet 352:1344–6.
Mirra SS, Schneider JA, Gearing M. 1997.
Neuropathology of movement disorders:
an overview. In: Watts RL, Koller WC,
editors. Movement disorders: neurologic
principles and practice. New York:
McGraw-Hill. p 125–34.
Mizuno Y, Ohta S, Tanaka M, Takamiya S,
Suzuki K, Sato T, and others. 1989.
Deficiencies in complex I subunits of the
respiratory chain in Parkinson’s disease.
Biochem Biophys Res Commun
163:1450–5.
Nicklas WJ, Vyas I, Heikkila RE. 1985.
Inhibition of NADH-linked oxidation in
brain mitochondria by 1-methyl-4-phenyl-
pyridine, a metabolite of the neurotoxin, 1-
methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,5,6-tetrahydropyri-
dine. Life Sci 36:2503–8.
Parker WD Jr, Boyson SJ, Parks JK. 1989.
Abnormalities of the electron transport
chain in idiopathic Parkinson’s disease.
Ann Neurol 26:719–23.
Polymeropoulos MH, Lavedan C, Leroy E, Ide
SE, Dehejia A, Dutra A, others. 1997.
Mutation in the alpha-synuclein gene
identified in families with Parkinson’s dis-
ease. Science 276:2045–7.
Priyadarshi A, Khuder SA, Schaub EA,
Priyadarshi SS. 2001. Environmental risk
factors and Parkinson’s disease: a meta-
analysis. Environ Res 86:122–7.
Priyadarshi A, Khuder SA, Schaub EA,
Shrivastava S. 2000. A meta-analysis of
Parkinson’s disease and exposure to pesti-
cides. Neurotoxicology 21:435–40.
Rodriguez MC, Obeso JA, Olanow CW. 1998.
Subthalamic nucleus-mediated excitotoxi-
city in Parkinson’s disease: a target for
neuroprotection. Ann Neurol 44:S175–88.
Schapira AH. 1998. Human complex I defects
in neurodegenerative diseases. Biochim
Biophys Acta 1364:261–70.
Schapira AH, Cooper JM, Dexter D, Jenner P,
Clark JB, Marsden CD. 1989.
Mitochondrial complex I deficiency in
Parkinson’s disease. Lancet 1:1269.
Sherer TB, Betarbet R, Greenamyre JT. 2001a.
The rotenone model of Parkinson’s disease
in vivo: selective striatal oxidative damage
and caspase-3 activation in nigrostriatal
neurons. Soc Neurosci Abstr No 653.2.
Sherer TB, Trimmer PA, Borland K, Parks JK,
Bennett JP Jr, Tuttle JB. 2001b. Chronic
reduction in complex I function alters cal-
cium signaling in SH-SY5Y neuroblas-
toma cells. Brain Res 891:94–105.
Souza JM, Giasson BI, Chen Q, Lee VM,
Ischiropoulos H. 2000. Dityrosine cross-
linking promotes formation of stable
alpha-synuclein polymers. Implication of
nitrative and oxidative stress in the patho-
genesis of neurodegenerative synucle-
inopathies. J Biol Chem 275:18344–9.
Spillantini MG, Schmidt ML, Lee VM,
Trojanowski JQ, Jakes R, Goedert M.
1997. Alpha-synuclein in Lewy bodies.
Nature 388:839–40.
Sriram K, Pai KS, Boyd MR, Ravindranath V.
1997. Evidence for generation of oxidative
stress in brain by MPTP: in vitro and in
vivo studies in mice. Brain Res
749:44–52.
Swerdlow RH, Parks JK, Miller SW, Tuttle JB,
Trimmer PA, Sheehan JP, and others.
1996. Origin and functional consequences
of the complex I defect in Parkinson’s dis-
ease. Ann Neurol 40:663–71.
Talpade DJ, Greene JG, Higgins DS Jr,
Greenamyre JT. 2000. In vivo labeling of
mitochondrial complex I (NADH:ubiqui-
none oxidoreductase) in rat brain using
[(3)H]dihydrorotenone. J Neurochem
75:2611–21.
Vila M, Vukosavic S, Jackson-Lewis V,
Neystat M, Jakowec M, Przedborski S.
2000. Alpha-synuclein up-regulation in
substantia nigra dopaminergic neurons
following administration of the parkinson-
ian toxin MPTP. J Neurochem 74:721–9.
Vingerhoets FJ, Snow BJ, Tetrud JW, Langston
JW, Schulzer M, Calne DB. 1994. Positron
emission tomographic evidence for pro-
gression of human MPTP-induced
dopaminergic lesions. Ann Neurol
36:765–70.
 at Univ of Newcastle upon Tyne on November 23, 2010nro.sagepub.comDownloaded from 
