Vol. 22 no. 4 2006, pages 485–492
doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btk009BIOINFORMATICS ORIGINAL PAPER
Databases and ontologies
MiGenes: a searchable interspecies database of mitochondrial
proteins curated using gene ontology annotation
Siddhartha Basu, Erich Bremer, Chun Zhou and Daniel F. Bogenhagen
C3
Department of Pharmacological Sciences, State University of New York at Stony Brook, Stony Brook,
NY 11794-8651, USA
Received on December 5, 2005; accepted on December 13, 2005
Advance Access publication December 20, 2005
Associate Editor: Jonathan Wren
ABSTRACT
Motivation: There has been an explosion of interest in the role of
mitochondria in programmed cell death and other fundamental patho-
logical processes underlying the development of human diseases.
Nevertheless, the inventory of mitochondrial proteins encoded in the
nucleargenomeremainsincomplete,providinganimpedimenttomito-
chondrialresearchattheinterfacewithsystemsbiology.Wecreatedthe
MiGenes database to further define the scope of the mitochondrial
proteome in humans and model organisms including mice, rats, flies
andwormsaswellasbuddingandfissionyeasts.MiGenesisintended
to stimulate mitochondrial research using model organisms.
Summary: MiGenes is a large-scale relational database that is auto-
matically updated to keep pace with advances in mitochondrial
proteomics and is curated to assure that the designation of proteins
asmitochondrialreflectsgeneontology(GO)annotationssupportedby
high-quality evidence codes. A set of postulates is proposed to help
define which proteins are authentic components of mitochondria.
MiGenes incorporates >1160 new GO annotations to human, mouse
and rat protein records, 370 of which represent the first GO annotation
reflecting a mitochondrial localization. MiGenes employs a flexible
search interface that permits batchwise accession number searches
to support high-throughput proteomic studies. A web interface is pro-
vided to permit members of the mitochondrial research community to
suggest modifications in protein annotations or mitochondrial status.
Availability: MiGenes is available at http://www.pharm.stonybrook.
edu/migenes
Supplementary Information: Supplementary data are available at
Bioinfo online.
Contact: dan@pharm.sunysb.edu
INTRODUCTION
Mitochondria are important organelles in higher eukaryotes
well-known for their role in cellular ATP synthesis by oxidative
phosphorylation coupled with electron transport. Mitochondria
perform crucial steps for heme biosynthesis, calcium signaling,
amino acid metabolism, synthesis of Fe/S clusters, and metabolism
of urea, amino acids, sterols and vitamin D as well as generation of
cellular reactive oxygen species (ROS). Mitochondria maintain
scavenging enzymes to protect the cell from ROS in addition to
a regulated inventory of pro- and anti-apoptotic factors involved in
programmed cell death. The mitochondrion is the only organelle
aside from the nucleus that contains its own genomic DNA, requir-
ing separate machinery for its maintenance and expression. Given
the prominence of mitochondria in diverse cellular processes, it is
not surprising that mitochondrial dysfunction in humans contributes
to a multitude of problems, including cancer, cardiomyopathy, dia-
betes, obesity and many types of neuronal degenerative diseases
(Wallace, 2005).
Mitochondrial DNA encodes only a handful of proteins, 13 in
vertebrates, requiring the vast majority of mitochondrial proteins to
be nuclear-encoded. Though the exact number is still unknown,
studies have suggested that mammalian mitochondria may contain
as many as 1500 proteins (Taylor et al., 2003b). Several recent
proteomic surveys have tried to address this issue by identifying
the complete set of mitochondrial proteins. Studies with mitochon-
dria from yeast (Sickmann et al., 2003) and human heart (Taylor
et al., 2003a) identified C24750 and C24544 proteins, respectively. A
recent study of mouse mitochondria generated a list of 591 proteins
and emphasized the conclusion that the mitochondrial proteome
varies in a tissue-specific manner (Mootha, 2003). In addition to
proteomics, several other genetic, genomic and bioinformatic
approaches have also been employed to increase the repertoire of
mitochondrial proteins. However, despite these efforts, a substantial
fraction of the mitochondrial proteome still remains unidentified.
The goal of determining the complete set of mitochondrial proteins
isbecoming farmorecomplicated andunmanageableasthedatasets
expand and, to an increasing extent, include false positive identi-
fications.Manyofthesefalse positivesrepresentproteinssequenced
as contaminants in partially purified mitochondrial fractions. The
annotation of some of these proteins as mitochondrial is a result of a
lack of defined standards that is confusing to researchers seeking to
understand the roles of newly discovered mitochondrial proteins.
These difficulties are compounded by the current state of bioinfor-
matics in which a protein may be known and cited under a variety of
name and accession number aliases.
Several databases have been generated to collate mitochondrial
proteins, including MitoProteome (http://www.mitoproteome.org/)
(Cotter et al., 2004), the Human Mitochondrial Protein Database
established by the National Institute of Standards and Technology
(http://bioinfo.nist.gov:8080/examples/servlets/index.html) and
MITOP2 (http://ihg.gsf.de/mitop2) (Andreoli et al., 2004). All of
thesedatabaseshavetheirownstrengthsandweaknesses. Forexam-
ple, MitoProteome and NIST are limited to human records, so that
their ability to incorporate results obtained with model organisms
C3
To whom correspondence should be addressed.
C211 The Author 2005. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org 485
is limited. MITOP2 provides an excellent resource for the mito-
chondrial research community, but shares some technical problems
with the other two databases. For example, MITOP2 cannot be
searched with GenBank accession numbers. These databases are
not particularly intuitive to the user; they often lack support for
flexible searches using various accession numbers and the search
interfaces sometimes require prior knowledge of database format or
content to retrieve information. The absence of sufficient curation
and heavy reliance on electronic annotation also permit the inclu-
sion of inappropriate or invalidated mitochondrial proteins.
Here we report the development of a mitochondrial protein data-
base ‘MiGenes’ in which we collected and integrated datasets from
a number of public sources that encompass mitochondrial proteins
of seven eukaryotic organisms. At this time, the database does not
includenon-proteinentries,suchasRNAsthatmaybeimportedinto
mitochondria. MiGenes supports a variety of accession number-
based as well as text-based keyword searches through a single
flexible interface. A batchwise retrieval mode has been tailored
forhigh-throughput accessionnumber-basedsearches. Everyrecord
in MiGenes, with few exceptions, is represented by a curated
‘RefSeq’ accession number and is mapped to an appropriate ‘Uni-
Prot’ accession number. We developed a ‘GO’ based search pro-
cedure and are in the process of curating records to establish an
evidence-based roster of mitochondrial proteins (Ashburner et al.,
2000). The MiGenes database is designed as a tool to help collate
evidence that qualifies novel proteins as mitochondrial.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Database design and data handling strategies
MiGenes is designed with 14 relational database tables that are conceptually
divided into gene and protein sections. Each entry in the database is com-
posed of a connecting gene and protein. For entries with multiple protein
isoforms, a gene is linked to multiple proteins. Both gene and protein entries
arepopulatedwithannotation,sequenceidentifiersandaccessionnumbersas
obtained from the public datasets. Each section can function independently
and is capable of receiving different sources of annotation. For each section
we have chosen a unique identifier: ‘Entrez gene id’ for genes and ‘RefSeq
NP_ accession number’ for proteins. We linked GO annotations to the
protein section to avoid instances of multiple isoforms receiving the
same GO terms. Redundancies are avoided by disallowing the inclusion
of shared accession numbers and sequence identifiers. Every entry in the
database is assigned an initial status of ‘mitochondrial,’ ‘mitochondria-
related’ or ‘unrelated’ based on the associated GO terms and evidence
codes. Entries without any GO annotation of mitochondrial location or
function are classified ‘unrelated.’ The initial status of an entry can only
be altered by an authorized curator in a process that requires adding or
negating a particular combination of GO term and evidence code. If GO
annotations that change the status of a protein are added by our database
sources, the status is automatically adjusted unless the change would violate
other curator-annotated decisions regarding status.
Data pipeline
The MiGenes database is populated by an automated process that involves
harvesting and integrating datasets from disparate public databases (Fig. 1).
These files are then processed by a series of upload programs roughly
equivalent to the steps of MiGenes build processes. For each build step
and for each database section, the linking of accession numbers precedes
the uploading of annotation datasets. The building process starts by popu-
lating the gene section with Entrezgene (ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gene/DATA/)
and UniGene (ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/repository/UniGene/) datasets and then, for
every gene, creates a placeholder for corresponding protein sections. Next,
the protein placeholders are populated with accession numbers and anno-
tations from the RefSeq (ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/refseq/release/) datasets. UniProt
accession numbers and annotations (www.pir.UniProt.org/database/
download.shtml) are then added to the protein section from its mapping
with RefSeq accession numbers. The mappings of RefSeq and UniProt
accession numbers, however, are prepared through a separate build process
described below. Next, from the non-redundant dataset (ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/blast/db/), another set of accession numbers and sequence identifiers is
extracted and uploaded to the protein section. Lastly, the protein section is
populated with homolog information from NCBI homologene (ftp.ncbi.nih.
gov/pub/HomoloGene/current) and GO annotations (ftp.ebi.ac.uk/pub/
databases/GO/goa/ and ftp.geneontology.org/pub/go/gene-associations/)
from the gene-association datasets. MiGenes is updated frequently in syn-
chrony with the release of the latest public datasets. However, instead of
rebuilding the database at every interval, the update process is run only for
the stages for which the latest release becomes available. No accession
number or sequence identifier is removed during updates; they are main-
tained in linkage with the current identifier, thereby providing better com-
patibility with publications that refer to older accession numbers. When a
primary RefSeq identifier is replaced, for example when an XP number is
replaced by an NP number, the replaced identifier is retained as an alias.
Validated mapping of Refseq and UniProt
accession numbers
To expand the cross-indexing or mapping of accession numbers between
major pubic databases, we first extracted the mapping data available from
various public datasets. International Protein Index (IPI; ftp.ebi.ac.uk/pub/
databases/IPI/current; human, mouse and rat; Kersey et al., 2004), GenBank
non-redundant datasets (nr; ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/blast/db/; all organism),
Mouse Genome Informatics (MGI; ftp.informatics.jax.org/pub/reports/
MRK_Sequence.rpt and MRK_SwissProt_TrEMBL.rpt; Blake et al.,
2003) and Saccharomyces Genome Database (genome-ftp.stanford.edu/
pub/yeast/data_download/chromosomal_feature/dbxref.tab; yeast) data-
sets were processed with bl2seq (pairwise BLAST) to generate the initial
dataset of mapped pairs. To generate a uniform, integrated dataset, we
performed an intra-organism reciprocal BLASTP search with RefSeq and
UniProt datasets. Both the public and our in-house mapped pairs were then
merged and the identical pairs were grouped into single entries. We
employed a conservative cutoff for a mapped pair where sequence identity
is >90%, difference of length is <10 amino acids and the cumulative gap
length is <5% of the total alignment length. Of the 3481 mapped pairs
identified by this procedure 3431 mapped pairs were identical in length
and sequence, but permitting variability allowed us to evaluate and link
the remaining 50 pairs that had slight discrepancies in the GenBank and
UniProt data sources. UniProt numbers for every pair that score above this
cutoff are designated as primary links with the corresponding RefSeq
numbers.
Design and construction of the GO browser
The organization of the MiGenes GO browser was created from the DAG
(directed acyclic graph) structure of GO terms. However, the content of the
graph was modified to include only the terms and relationships that are
relevant to mitochondria. From the three ontologies, we selected less-
specialized terms that broadly account for the established aspects of mito-
chondrial biology. From each of the selected terms, we collected groups of
subordinate terms that describe specific aspects of mitochondrial functions
(Supplementary Table 1). Both the broad and specific terms are used for
classification of status, whereas only the broad terms are used for display. If
present, secondary identifiers and synonyms of relevant GO terms are also
included. In effect, the MiGenes GO browser presents higher level less-
specific terms where the specific child terms remain implicit. GO terms and
relationships are downloaded as mysql dumps (http://archive.godatabase.
org/latest-full/) and then uploaded to the MiGenes table. The tree structure
S.Basu et al.
486
is first built from the four tables of the GO database schema: term, term2-
term, term-synonym and graph path. The structure is then modified dynami-
cally by applying the filtering criteria from an internal MiGenes table which
keeps track of terms that are used to display the tree and gene-association.
Software implementation
InMiGenes,harvestingofpublicdatasets,buildingofvalidatedmappingand
upload process are performed by a series of Perl scripts. Bioperl libraries
(Stajich et al., 2002) are used extensively for parsing, transformation and
local access of biological data records. GO-perl libraries (http://www.
godatabase.org/dev/index.html) are used for parsing of gene ontology
gene-association files. The web interface is implemented in Sun Java
(JDK1.4- http://java.sun.com) using java servlet technology running on
an Apache Tomcat 5.5.9 (http://jakarta.apache.org/tomcat/index.html) ser-
ver. A Mysql 4.1· (http://www.mysql.com) server is used as the storage
engine for the database
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The problem-oriented design of MiGenes. Problem 1:
identifying and cross-referencing records in diverse
data sources
In our efforts to organize information on mitochondrial proteomes,
we encountered a number of problems that we endeavored to solve
withintheMiGenesdatabase,someofwhichwerepointedoutinthe
Introduction. One of our goals was to merge data from important
mammalian and non-mammalian species in a single database in
order to take advantage of the wealth of information available
from these model organisms that may support or refute the conclu-
sion that a particular protein plays a role in mitochondria. We found
that data resources on mitochondrial proteins were scattered; in
many cases genomic sequencing projects did not carefully consider
the subcellular location of proteins. The exception to this was
the yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, where extensive data
analysis has provided a substantial data resource (Prokisch et al.,
2004; Sickmann et al., 2003).
One of the major obstacles we encountered in building MiGenes
was that we observed that many GenBank entries were not cross-
indexed, or mapped, to UniProt entries, or vice versa. In addition,
many of the entries that were cross-indexed did not have identical
protein sequences in the two databases. Some specialized databases
used their own identifiers that were typically not mapped to both
GenBank and UniProt entries. The data flow and build process used
to coordinate data from diverse sources in order to construct the
MiGenes database is described in Materials and Methods and illus-
trated in Figure 1. We adopted the convention that proteins should
be identified by their NCBI RefSeq numbers whenever possible and
that UniProt, other sequence identifiers (GI) and specialized data-
base identifiers should be cross-referenced as accession number
aliases. In the process of linking records, we performed systematic
BLAST searches to align and validate the mapping (or cross-
indexing) between Refseq and UniProt accession numbers. We
imported UniProt based gene-associations for worm, fly and fission
yeast that are not available from the RefSeq dataset. This enables
users to identify the correct RefSeq entity using any valid accession
Fig. 1. MiGenes dataflow. Data processing starts with the downloading of data from public sources on the right, followed by the application of algorithms to
coordinateandvalidatemappingofrecordsbetweendiversesourcesandtosortrecordsaccordingtotheirmitochondrialstatus.Avarietyofdisplayoptionsmake
thedatabaseaccessibleviaawebinterface.Listsofrecordsmatchingaquerycanbedownloadedasatab-delimitedlisttobeimportedintoaspreadsheetsuchas
Excel.
MiGenes mitochondrial protein database
487
number alias. This goal was particularly important for interpretation
of protein lists in high-throughput sequencing studies. For example,
alargestudyofthemousemitochondrialproteomebyMoothaetal.,
(2003) reported results using GI sequence identifiers, whereas
another study by Da Cruz et al., (2003) reported UniProt accession
numbers of inner membrane mitochondrial proteins. The cross-
reference mappings of the MiGenes project allowed us to integrate
and analyze these diverse datasets.
We encountered instances of accession numbers reported in pub-
lished datasets that have been replaced by new identifiers in the
public databases. We incorporated a historical tracking mechanism
in the MiGenes database that permits the current record to be iden-
tified even by retired accession numbers. However, maintaining a
comprehensive list of accession number aliases remains a challeng-
ing problem and we still occasionally encounter instances where
cited accession numbers fail to identify any records. We estimate
that, on average, a typical MiGenes entry can be accessed through
over 150 accession numbers and sequence identifiers.
Problem 2: determining which proteins are truly
mitochondrial
A protein is considered mitochondrialif solidevidence supportsGO
annotations that reflect either location in a mitochondrial subcom-
partment,molecularfunctionsexplicitlydefinedasmitochondrialor
a role in biological processes widely accepted as occurring only in
mitochondria (terms shown in Supplementary Table 1). These GO
terms permit some uncertainty. For example, while we accept
cellular component annotations for mitochondrial matrix, inner
and outer membrane, and intermembrane space, we tried not to
include a protein that simply adhered to the outer membrane unless
the protein was an intrinsic membrane protein, like monoamine
oxidase. We adopted criteria that we refer to as ‘Mito Postulates’
to help decide whether a protein is mitochondrial (Fig. 2). The first
guideline stipulates that the mitochondrial localization or function
of a protein must be supported by an appropriate GO descriptor
supported by one or more of the strong evidence codes listed in
Table 1. Other GO terms were not considered convincing, such as
NAS or ‘non-traceable author statement,’ a type of evidence that
Fig. 2. Mitopostulates for classification of proteins as mitochondrial.
Table1. List of strongand weak GO evidence codesused to classify records
in MiGenes
Strong evidence codes Weak evidence codes
IMP, inferred from
mutant phenotype
ISS, inferred from sequence similarity
IGI, inferred from
genetic interaction
IEA, inferred from electronic
annotation
IPI, inferred from
physical interaction
IEP, inferred from expression pattern
TAS, traceable author statement NAS, non-traceable author statement
IC, inferred by curator ND, no biological data available
IDA, inferred from direct assay RCA, Inferred from reviewed
computational analysis
S.Basu et al.
488
might be considered hearsay in a judicial context. In contrast, we
accept the evidence code TAS, ‘traceable author statement’ when
accompanied by a literature citation (PubMed ID) in the absence of
contradictory evidence of high quality. Other questionable evidence
codes are ISS, ‘inferred by sequence similarity’ and IEP ‘inferred
from expression pattern.’ The validity of the ISS code clearly
depends on the criteria used as a cutoff, as discussed in more detail
later. We considered IEP to be a weak criterion specifically to avoid
gene products from being automatically classified as mitochondrial
based on an expression pattern similar to known mitochondrial
proteins. Setting these strict criteria required that we reject some
proteins from the mitochondrial group pending further investiga-
tion. Proteins tagged by GO terms supported by less definitive
evidence codes were classified as ‘mitochondria-related’ proteins.
This is admittedly a broad ‘catch all’ category intended to identify
proteins to track to determine whether new evidence might support
a mitochondrial designation in the future. Listing a protein as
‘mitochondria-related’ may direct further studies to test its mito-
chondrial localization.
These criteria provide only the initial assessment of the potential
mitochondrial role of a protein. Many mitochondrial proteins may
be missed if the existing GO annotations are not complete or accu-
rate.OwingtoerrorsintheGOdatabase,ourcriteriapermittedentry
into the MiGenes database of a number of proteins that we con-
sidered false positives. The single greatest source of these false
positives was found to be electronic annotation of records as mito-
chondrial using the evidence code IDA to reflect the fact that the
protein had been identified when proteins in a mitochondrial cell
fraction were sequenced using high-throughput or shotgun
approaches. Given the power of modern mass spectrometric protein
sequencing, it is physically impossible to purify mitochondria with
no contaminating proteins from other compartments. We adopted
the standard of placing a protein in the ‘mitochondria-related’ cate-
gory when an IDA evidence code based on protein sequencing was
in conflict with an established role in another cellular compartment.
A large number of proteins are annotated with conflicting evi-
dence codes relating to their subcellular localization, generating
considerable confusion. It is appropriate to permit a protein record
to carry apparently conflicting location codes, since many genes are
expressed in alternative forms with different cellular locations. In
many cases this reflects the existence of distinct protein isoforms
targeted at different cellular locations, as discussed later. We have
not been able to generate a fully automated procedure to deal with
such situations. Our solution has been to manually curate records in
the ‘mitochondria-related’ category to review the evidence for and
against mitochondrial localization.
During the process of developing and testing these criteria, we
noticedthattheliberaluseofelectronicannotationshasintroduceda
very large number of GO term assignments that are either incorrect
or inconsistent with other GO terms. For example, high-throughput
gene discovery efforts have given many mitochondrial proteins a
GO assignment reflecting an extracellular location. Since the GO
database is currently usedas a very common resource for annotation
of gene and protein function, every effort must be made to improve
the accuracy of GO term assignments.
Curation of functional protein groups Automated sorting of
human entries revealed a large number of apparently authentic
mitochondrial proteins with ‘mitochondria-related’ status. We have
adjusted the mitochondrial status of many proteins by manual
curation from literature references. For example, the initial anno-
tation of mammalian mitochondrial ribosomal proteins using only
automated procedures provided only a short list of mitochondrial
ribosomal proteins. We analyzed data from Suzuki et al. (2001a,b)
and Koc et al. (2001a,b) and assigned ‘mitochondrial’ status to
61 additional human and 31 additional mouse ribosomal proteins.
From the work of Vo et al. (2004) we annotated 11 proteins
involved in mitochondrial metabolism and promoted them to ‘mito-
chondrial’ status. A total of 10 mitochondrial carrier proteins were
also annotated as mitochondrial based on the reviews of Palmieri,
(2004) and del Arco et al. (2004).
Orthology-based curation Sequence similarity is widely used as
a criterion to assign a function to a conserved protein. However,
especially for newly-sequenced genomes, where many genes may
be predicted by gene-recognition software, this homology-based
criterion has the potential to link a gene whose function is well
known in one organism to a paralog or pseudogene of its true
ortholog in another organism. Our second Mitopostulate (Fig. 2)
expresses clear guidelines for the conservative use of sequence
homology as a criterion for assigning mitochondrial status. During
our curation process, we generated a list of 284 human–mouse
orthologs (from the NCBI homologene project) where both proteins
had mitochondrial status. BLAST searches showed that 95% of
these protein pairs differed in length by <20 residues and shared
at least 70% sequence identity. The NCBI homologene dataset
included an additional 176 human–mouse protein pairs where
one ortholog had been proven to be mitochondrial but the other
had ‘mitochondria-related’ status. By applying the cutoffs estab-
lished for true orthologs, we resolved nearly 80% of these discrep-
ancies in mitochondrial status. The classification of rat entries was
accomplished by comparing them with both human and mouse
‘mitochondrial’ orthologs, permitting 270 rat entries to be promoted
to ‘mitochondrial’ status (Fig. 3). In cases where the BLASTP
search for rat proteins related to a known human and mouse mito-
chondrial proteinidentifieda bestreciprocalmatch thatdid notmeet
our cutoff criteria, this rat protein would be left in the ‘mitochon-
dria-related’ category.
We nextextended thisorthology-based curation to human–mouse
protein pairs where the status of one of the proteins was initially
‘unrelated’ to mitochondrial function, indicating that one protein
lacked any electronic annotation of mitochondrial status. This
search identified proteins that were given ‘mitochondrial’ status
byautomatedGOannotationseven whentheproteinhadnoobvious
association with mitochondria but did have conflicting GO term
assignments for another cellular compartment. A total of 73 mouse
proteins were demoted to ‘unrelated’ status following this analysis,
including obvious errors of high-throughput sequencing such as
annotation of trypsinogen and hemoglobin as mitochondrial. Addi-
tional mouse entries, 15, were demoted from ‘mitochondrial’ to
‘mitochondria-related’ as they warrant further experimental atten-
tion to confirm their association.
In the case of invertebrates, worm and fly, the majority of the
entries categorized as ‘mitochondria-related’ were tagged with
weak evidence codes such as ISS or IEA. Lack of extensive experi-
mental support coupled with their evolutionary distances from their
mammalian partners required us to adopt a conservative approach
during our initial curation efforts. Entries with at least two
MiGenes mitochondrial protein database
489
mitochondrial mammalian orthologs having pairwise identity not
<40% and size difference not >20 amino acids were considered for
curation. For the curation of fly entries, the dataset of Tripoli et al.
(2005) was employed as additional support material. This resulted
in promotion of 298 fly and 207 worm entries to ‘mitochondrial’
status (Fig. 3).
Overall, 1162 mammalian and 574 fly or worm protein
entries were curated with a new mitochondrial GO term using
our ‘Mitopostulates.’ These include 370 mammalian entries
(96 human, 126 mouse and 148 rat) that were annotated with a
mitochondrialGOtermforthefirsttime.Table2showsthenumbers
of records classified as ‘mitochondrial’ and ‘mitochondria-related’
in the seven reference organisms. Supplementary Table 2 lists over
1700 GO annotation recommendations sent to the GO consortium
following this initial round of curation.
Problem 3: dealing with multiple protein isoforms
linked to a single gene locus
One of the greatest obstacles facing proteomic research is the prob-
lem of dealing with multiple isoforms of a protein encoded by a
single genetic locus. Many mitochondrial proteins are isoforms of
proteins found in other cellular locations (Danpure, 1995). Differ-
ential localization is often achieved by differential translation
initiation or differential splicing. The multiplicity of protein
isoformscomplicatesproteinidentificationusingmassspectrometry
since different isoforms can give different ion signatures. In many
cases, the amount of protein sequence information obtained in an
experiment is not sufficient to distinguish which of several isoforms
may be present in a particular sample since the identified peptides
may be common to several isoforms. Thus, protein sequencing
studies often do not resolve the issue of defining which isoforms
of a protein may be imported into mitochondria. When a single
isoformisshowntobemitochondrial,thepublicdatabaseoftenadds
to the complexity by annotating the gene locus, thereby designating
all the isoforms as mitochondrial. In addition, NCBI RefSeq and
UniProt records sometimes designate different isoforms as the
canonical sequence, so that these are sometimes not the best recip-
rocalmatches.Itisalong-termgoaloftheMiGenesdatabasetohelp
resolve inconsistent annotations of mitochondrial proteins repre-
sented by multiple isoforms. This issue will only be resolved by
careful annotation that is beyond the scope of the initial release of
MiGenes. We consider that MiGenes will be a very useful tool for
continued annotation of mitochondrial proteins.
Description of MiGenes Functions
Search interfaces The basic search interface (Fig. 4) is highly
flexible to anticipate any search string a researcher is likely to use. It
can be queried with text, keywords, accession numbers or sequence
Fig. 3. Effect of orthology-based curation on the MiGenes protein records of various organisms. Mitopostulate #2 was applied for inter-species comparison of
orthologsthatresultedinthereclassificationofthemitochondrialstatusofnumerousrecords.Theresultantlistswerethenusedforanotherroundofcomparison
and curation as a control for the manual curation process.
Table 2. Enumeration of MiGenes records (as of 10.5.2005)
Organism Genes Proteins
Mitochondrial Mitochondria-related Mitochondrial Mitochondria-related
Homo sapiens 594 179 717 221
Mus musculus 606 159 614 163
Rattus norvegicus 386 271 386 271
Drosophila melanogaster 382 233 400 324
Caenorhabditis elegans 224 326 224 334
Saccharomyces cerevisiae 994 41 994 41
Saccharomyces pombe 36 484 36 484
S.Basu et al.
490
identifiers. By default, it is restricted to a single organism selected
from a drop-down list. A wide range of known and publicly avail-
able accession number and sequence identifiers are supported and
can be queried through this interface. In the simplest case, a unique
matching record is returned. For an ambiguous search, a list of
records may be returned where the isoforms, if present are grouped
together. Every record in the list is displayed as a hyperlink to its
detail report screen.
The batch search interface can be queried with a list of accession
numbers or sequence identifiers that can include a mixture of het-
erogeneousaccessionnumbersorsequenceidentifiers.Thereportof
matching records can be exported as an Excel spreadsheet. This
makes the batch search suitable for post-processing of high-
throughput protein sequencing data that generates a list of accession
numbers or sequence identifiers as its final output.
The GO search interface is built around those GO terms that are
appropriate fordescribingthefunctionsofmitochondrialgene prod-
ucts. Our GO browser displays a trimmed-down version of the
directed acyclic graph structure (Supplementary Table 1). A search
through this interface retrieves lists of proteins annotated with the
selected GO terms. Modifications of GO term assignments can be
made by our curators through a curator interface, which is not
publicly accessible. However, users can submit recommendations
for modifications to GO terms through a comment screen that
requests the term to be changed, the supporting evidence code
and an applicable PubMed identifier. It is our intention to collect
recommendations for changes in the GO term assignments sug-
gested byourcurators andusers ofthedatabase tobecommunicated
regularlytotheGOconsortium.Thisensuresaproperdissemination
of high qualitycurated datato the entire research community, which
is one of the major goals of the MiGenes database.
Data Displays MiGenes has notbeen designed as a primary data
repository, but rather as a gateway to collate information available
from centralized sequence databases. The main single-record report
screen is organized into two sections for a better understanding and
analysis of annotations that are available in MiGenes. The first
section of the record describes the name of gene and protein
along with all the aliases associated with it. Primary sequences
and other information are accessed through links to Entrez gene
(Maglott et al., 2005), RefSeq (Pruitt et al., 2005) and UniProt
(Bairoch et al., 2005) public databases. In order to keep most per-
tinent data on one screen, a drop-down selection is provided to
access any of four expanded lists of relevant information. These
options include (1) a list of published references, (2) a list of
orthologous proteins in other organisms, (3) comments generated
Fig.4. MiGenessearchstrategies.Allthreeinterfacesgeneratelistsofrecordsmatchingsearchcriteria.Theusercantheneitherdownloadthelistinaspreadsheet
format or navigate further to the detailed report screen for an individual record of interest.
MiGenes mitochondrial protein database
491
by curators and (4) a list of GO annotations describing properties of
the protein. These GO annotations and their evidence codes, with
PubMed ID’s, provide the basis for classification of a protein as
‘mitochondrial’ or ‘mitochondria-related.’
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was supported by grant 5 R01 ES012039 from NIEHS
to D.F.B.
Conflict of Interest: none declared.
REFERENCES
Andreoli,C. et al. (2004) MitoP2, an integrated database on mitochondrial proteins in
yeast and man. Nucleic Acids Res., 32, D459–D462.
Ashburner,M. et al. (2000) Gene Ontology: tool for the unification of biology. The
Gene Ontology Consortium. Nat. Genet., 25, 25–29.
Bairoch,A. et al. (2005) The Universal Protein Resource (UniProt). Nucleic Acids Res.,
33, D154–D159.
Blake,J.A. et al. (2003) MGD: the Mouse Genome Database. Nucleic Acids Res., 31,
193–195.
Cotter,D. et al. (2004) MitoProteome: mitochondrial protein sequence database and
annotation system. Nucleic Acids Res., 32, D463–D467.
Da Cruz,S. et al. (2003) Proteomic analysis of the mouse liver mitochondrial inner
membrane. J. Biol. Chem., 278, 41566–41571.
Danpure,C.J. (1995) How can the products of a single gene be localized to more than
one intracellular compartment? Trends Cell. Biol., 5, 230–238.
del Arco,A. and Satrustegui,J. (2004) Identification of a novel human subfamily of
mitochondrial carriers with calcium-binding domains. J. Biol. Chem., 279,
24701–24713.
Kersey,P.J. et al. (2004) The International Protein Index: an integrated database for
proteomics experiments. Proteomics, 4, 1985–1988.
Koc,E.C. et al. (2001a) The small subunit of the mammalian mitochondrial ribosome.
Identification of the full complement of ribosomal proteins present. J. Biol. Chem.,
276, 19363–19374.
Koc,E.C. et al. (2001b) The large subunit of the mammalian mitochondrial ribosome.
Analysis of the complement of ribosomal proteins present. J. Biol. Chem., 276,
43958–43969.
Maglott,D. et al. (2005) Entrez Gene: gene-centered information at NCBI. Nucleic
Acids Res., 33, D54–D58.
Mootha,V.K. et al. (2003) Integrated analysis of protein composition, tissue diversity,
and gene regulation in mouse mitochondria. Cell, 115, 629–640.
Palmieri,F. (2004) The mitochondrial transporter family (SLC25): physiological and
pathological implications. Pflugers Arch., 447, 689–709.
Prokisch,H. et al. (2004) Integrative analysis of the mitochondrial proteome in yeast.
PLoS Biol., 2, e160.
Pruitt,K.D. et al. (2005) NCBI Reference Sequence (RefSeq): a curated non-redundant
sequence database of genomes, transcripts and proteins. Nucleic Acids Res., 33,
D501–D504.
Sickmann,A. et al. (2003) The proteome of Saccharomyces cerevisiae mitochondria.
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci, USA, 100, 13207–13212.
Stajich,J.E.etal.(2002)TheBioperltoolkit:Perlmodules forthelifesciences.Genome
Res., 12, 1611–1618.
Suzuki,T. et al. (2001a) Structural compensation for the deficit of rRNA with proteins
in the mammalian mitochondrial ribosome: systematic analysis of protein compo-
nentsofthelargeribosomalsubunitfrommammalianmitochondria.J.Biol.Chem.,
276, 21724–21736.
Suzuki,T. et al. (2001b) Proteomic analysis of the mammalian mitochondrial ribosome.
Identification of protein components in the 28 S small subunit. J. Biol. Chem., 276,
33181–33195.
Taylor,S. et al. (2003a) Characterization of the human heart mitochondrial proteome.
Nat. Biotechnol., 21, 282–286.
Taylor,S.W. et al. (2003b) Global organellar proteomics. Trends Biotechnol.,
21, 82–88.
Tripoli,G. et al. (2005) Comparison of the oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS)
nuclear genes in the genomes of Drosophila melanogaster, Drosophila pseudoob-
scura and Anopheles gambiae. Genome Biol., 6, R11.
Vo,T.D. et al. (2004) Reconstruction and functional characterization of the human
mitochondrial metabolic network based on proteomic and biochemical data.
J. Biol. Chem., 279, 39532–39540.
Wallace,D.C. (2005) A mitochondrial paradigm of metabolic and degenerative dis-
eases, aging, and cancer: a dawn for evolutionary medicine. Annu. Rev. Genet., 39,
359–407.
S.Basu et al.
492
