MITOCHONDRIAL DNA MUTATIONS IN HUMAN DISEASE
Robert W. Taylor and Doug M. Turnbull
Mitochondrial Research Group, School of Neurology, Neurobiology and Psychiatry, The Medical
School, University of Newcastle upon Tyne, NE2 4HH, United Kingdom.
Abstract
The human mitochondrial genome is extremely small compared with the nuclear genome, and
mitochondrial genetics presents unique clinical and experimental challenges. Despite the diminutive
size of the mitochondrial genome, mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) mutations are an important cause
of inherited disease. Recent years have witnessed considerable progress in understanding basic
mitochondrial genetics and the relationship between inherited mutations and disease phenotypes, and
in identifying acquired mtDNA mutations in both ageing and cancer. However, many challenges
remain, including the prevention and treatment of these diseases. This review explores the advances
that have been made and the areas in which future progress is likely.
Until recently, mitochondrial genetics and diseases that are due to defects in mitochondrial
DNA (mtDNA) were often considered to be curiosities, outside mainstream genetics. These
views were not helped by the different genetic rules by which mtDNA is inherited compared
with nuclear DNA, the presence of several mtDNA copies in individual cells and a belief that
mtDNA disease is rare. In addition, the clinical syndromes caused by mtDNA mutations have
variable phenotypes and are often described by instantly forgettable eponyms or acronyms1.
These views perhaps ignore the fact that the mitochondrial genome is central to the study of
evolutionary genetics, has an important role in forensic medicine2 and that the human, bovine
and mouse mitochondrial genomes were the first mammalian genomes to be completely
sequenced3–5.
The increasing ease with which the mitochondrial genome can be analysed, and the availability
of a consensus human sequence6, have both helped to recognize mtDNA disorders as a frequent
cause of genetic disease. It is difficult to estimate the true prevalence of mtDNA disease owing
to its many clinical guises, presentations and the involvement of numerous causative mutations.
Data on a single-point mutation (3243A>G) in Finland indicate that approximately 1 in 6,000
individuals are affected, whereas estimates from the British population intimate that about 1
in 3,500 people either have mtDNA disease or are at risk of developing it7,8. These estimates
do not include the recent apparent association of mtDNA mutations and common clinical
features (for example, hypertension)9, which indicate that the incidence could be higher still.
In addition, there is increasing evidence from animal models10 and human studies11 that
acquired mtDNA mutations and mitochondrial dysfunction are involved in ageing and age-
related diseases such as diabetes12,13. Although our present knowledge already indicates that
mtDNA mutations are an important cause of disease, the true impact of these mutations on
human health remains to be determined.
This review focuses on abnormalities of the mitochondrial genome in relation to human disease.
Mitochondrial disease can also arise from nuclear gene disorders because most proteins
Correspondence to D.M.T. e-mail: d.m.turnbull@ncl.ac.uk.
Competing interests statement
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
UKPMC Funders Group
Author Manuscript
Nat Rev Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2007 January 4.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Rev Genet. 2005 May ; 6(5): 389–402.
UKPMC Funders Group Author Manuscript
UKPMC Funders Group Author Manuscript
involved in mitochondrial metabolism and all those involved in mtDNA maintenance are
nuclear-encoded. Mutations in these nuclear genes can mimic the features seen in patients with
mtDNA defects, and indeed some nuclear genetic disorders result in secondary abnormalities
of the mitochondrial genome. Excellent reviews describe the defects that are due to mutations
in nuclear genes that are involved in mitochondrial oxidative metabolism1,14,15. Here we
review our current understanding of the role of mtDNA in human disease and highlight areas
that are either controversial or merit further studies. We first review the basic features of
mitochondrial genetics. Much progress has been made in this area and a clear understanding
is important to further our knowledge of the diagnosis, pathogenesis and treatment of mtDNA
disease. We then turn to clinical syndromes that are due to mtDNA mutations, recognizing that
mtDNA mutations might cause various clinical features, which often makes diagnosis a
considerable challenge. Even when diagnosed, there is no curative treatment for patients who
have mtDNA disease. Nonetheless, there are several experimental possibilities to either prevent
transmission or to correct the genetic defect and these are discussed here. Although models of
mtDNA disease exist, these are predominantly cell-based rather than transgenic mouse models.
Some valuable models are available, but few mimic the characteristics of pathogenic mtDNA
mutations. We conclude by considering the possible role of the mitochondrial genome in
ageing, which, despite much speculation, has only recently been supported by firm evidence
from an animal model.
Mitochondrial genetics: the basics
Mitochondria are found in all nucleated cells and are the principal generators of cellular ATP
by oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS), incorporating the electron-transferring respiratory
chain (complexes I–IV) and the ATP synthase (complex V). Mitochondria are the only location
of extra-chromosomal DNA within the cell (except in plant chloroplasts), and they are under
the dual genetic control of both nuclear DNA and the mitochondrial genome. The mitochondrial
genome consists of a multicopy, circular dsDNA molecule (16.6 kb in humans), which encodes
13 essential polypep-tides of the OXPHOS system and the necessary RNA machinery (2
rRNAs and 22 tRNAs) for their translation within the organelle (FIG. 1). The remaining protein
subunits that make up the respiratory-chain complexes, together with those required for
mtDNA maintenance, are nuclear-encoded, synthesized on cytoplasmic ribosomes, and are
specifically targeted and sorted to their correct location within the organelle.
Mitochondrial genetics is different from Mendelian genetics in almost every aspect, from the
uniparental inheritance of disease mutations, to the presence of many copies of the genome
within a single cell and the basic mechanisms that underlie replication and control of
transcription (TABLE 1). The differences between the two genetic systems that are in human
cells are probably a relic of evolution16, but lead to some fascinating biology that dictates the
functional consequences of mtDNA mutations.
Replication, transcription and translation of mitochondrial DNA
Both replication and transcription are important in terms of understanding the development of
mtDNA mutations and their biochemical consequences. There is now good evidence to indicate
that the minimal mitochondrial replisome17 consists of several proteins. These include: the
heterodimeric mtDNA polymerase γ, which consists of a catalytic subunit with proof-reading
ability (PolgA) and a processivity subunit (PolgB)18, Twinkle, which has 5′–3′ DNA helicase
activity19, and a mitochondrial single-stranded binding protein. Together with mitochondrial
transcription factor A (TFAM), these proteins associate with mtDNA to form structures that
are termed NUCLEOIDS, which are believed to be the units of mtDNA transmission and
inheritance.
NUCLEOID
Taylor and Turnbull Page 2
Nat Rev Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2007 January 4.
UKPMC Funders Group Author Manuscript
UKPMC Funders Group Author Manuscript
A dynamic complex that consists of several copies of mitochondrial DNA and key
maintenance proteins within the organelle.
POLYCISTRONIC
A form of gene organization that results in transcription of an mRNA that codes for
multiple gene products, each of which is independently translated from the mRNA.
The mode of mtDNA replication has recently become the subject of much debate. On the basis
of ultrastructural and biochemical analyses, mtDNA replication had been considered to occur
by a strand-displacement model20, in which replication of the leading (heavy (H)) strand occurs
first, initiating at a specific site (called OH) in the non-coding control region (FIG. 1). When
leading-strand replication has reached two-thirds around the genome, the origin of replication
(OL) on the lagging (light (L)) strand is exposed, allowing L-strand synthesis to occur in the
opposite direction. Recent studies using two-dimensional gel electrophoresis challenge this
model by providing evidence, in human, mouse and avian tissues, of a more conventional
replication mechanism in which leading-lagging strand DNA replication is coordinated21–23
. The two modes of replication have been hotly debated24–26 and the recent description of
another D-loop origin of replication adds further interest to this debate27. Nascent chains that
start at this origin do not terminate prematurely and seem to be mainly responsible for mtDNA
maintenance under steady-state conditions.
Our understanding of the transcriptional machinery in mammalian mitochondria has improved,
predominantly owing to the identification of specific proteins and the development of an in
vitro system to dissect out the regulatory features28. In human mtDNA, transcriptional
initiation can occur on both strands. Transcription from the mitochondrial promoters produces
a POLYCISTRONIC precursor RNA that is then processed to produce individual tRNA and
mRNA molecules29,30. To initiate transcription, the dedicated mitochondrial RNA
polymerase (POLRMT) requires TFAM, and either mitochondrial transcription factor B1
(TFB1M) or B2 (TFB2M)31,32. Recent evidence shows that TFAM induces a structural
change of the light-strand promoter that is required for POLRMT-dependent promoter
recognition33. The importance of mitochondrial transcription to cellular dysfunction as a result
of pathogenic mtDNA mutations is a neglected area of research that might give important
insights into some of the tissue-specific or mutation-specific effects.
The mRNAs for the 13 mtDNA-encoded OXPHOS proteins are translated on mitochondrial
ribosomes. Mutations in mitochondrial tRNA or rRNA genes affect pathology by disrupting
mitochondrial translation34 and recent research has concentrated on identifying nuclear
factors, including mitochondrial ribosomal proteins (MRPs), that are essential for this process.
The first mutations in these nuclear genes, including MRPS16 (mitochondrial ribosomal protein
S16)35 and EFG1 (officially known as GFM1; G elongation factor, mitochondrial 1)36 have
recently been described in consanguineous families that have generalized mitochondrial
translation defects.
Homoplasmy and heteroplasmy
The polyploid nature of the mitochondrial genome — up to several thousand copies per cell
— gives rise to an important feature of mitochondrial genetics, homoplasmy and heteroplasmy.
In simple terms, homoplasmy is when all copies of the mitochondrial genome are identical;
heteroplasmy is when there is a mixture of two or more mitochondrial genotypes. The value
of these terms is apparent when we consider mtDNA mutations that lead to disease. Some
mutations affect all copies of the mitochondrial genome (homoplasmic mutation), whereas
others are only present in some copies of the mitochondrial genome (heteroplasmic mutation).
In the presence of heteroplasmy, there is a threshold level of mutation that is important for both
the clinical expression of the disease and for biochemical defects, as routinely demonstrated
Taylor and Turnbull Page 3
Nat Rev Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2007 January 4.
UKPMC Funders Group Author Manuscript
UKPMC Funders Group Author Manuscript
by the cytochemical assessment of cytochrome c oxidase (COX; complex IV) activity in an
individual cell (FIG. 2). Numerous single-cell and TRANSMITOCHONDRIAL CYBRID
CELL studies have shown that the mutated form is functionally recessive and that a biochemical
phenotype is associated with high levels of mutation above a crucial threshold37.
TRANSMITOCHONDRIAL CYBRID
Derived from the term ‘cytoplasmic hybrid’. A cell line that is used to study the
pathophysiological consequences of any given mitochondrial DNA mutation in a
control nuclear background. Cybrids are generated by fusing patient cytoplasts
(enucleated cells that contain mitochondria) with a cell line that lacks mitochondrial
DNA.
The concept of homoplasmy is more apparent than real. In most individuals there is no evidence
of heteroplasmy, but all available evidence indicates that mtDNA is constantly undergoing
mutation, with clonal expansion or loss of either point mutations or deletions38,39. Because
these acquired mutations occur at random, all acquired mutations will be present at a low level
and therefore might not be detected in a tissue homogenate or blood sample. Perhaps we should
only use ‘homoplasmy’ to describe a state in which we cannot detect these acquired mutations,
although it would be naive to think that all mitochondrial genomes within an individual, tissue
or even a cell are identical.
Inheritance of mitochondrial DNA
The standard model of mtDNA inheritance is that it is transmitted strictly through the maternal
line40 and that mtDNA lineages are therefore clonal. However, this model has recently been
challenged. Low levels of paternal transmission of mtDNA have been observed in crosses
between mouse species, but not within species41, although further studies showed that this
paternal mtDNA was not transmitted to the subsequent generation42. In addition, there is
evidence that recombination has contributed to the distribution of mtDNA polymorphisms
within the human population43. Although recombination might occur at the cellular level44,45
, the occurrence of recombination within the population is contentious46. Studies of a patient
with mitochondrial myopathy — who carried a novel, 2-bp pathogenic deletion in the NADH
(reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide) dehydrogenase subunit 2 (ND2) gene in his
muscle mtDNA — have also challenged the maternal inheritance of mtDNA47. Using
haplotype analysis, this sporadic mutation was present in paternally derived mtDNA, although
the deletion itself was not evident in the father’s mtDNA. With the exception of skeletal muscle,
all other tissues contained a single, maternally derived mtDNA haplotype. Subsequent studies
of other patients with mitochondrial myopathies have not shown any evidence of paternal
transmission48–50, even when assisted reproduction techniques were applied51,52.
LEBER HEREDITARY OPTIC NEUROPATHY
A mitochondrial disease that is characterized by optic nerve dysfunction, which leads
to bilateral visual failure in young adults.
GENETIC BOTTLENECK
A temporary reduction in population size that causes the loss of genetic variation.
Mitochondrial DNA transmission
The current genetic advice is that fathers with mtDNA mutations are at no risk of transmitting
the defect to their offspring. Maternal transmission of mutated mtDNA occurs, but the risk
depends on the type of mutation and possibly the segregation of the mutation within maternal
tissues. Identifying specific mtDNA mutations and investigating family members for evidence
of transmission will give guidance to the likelihood of transmission through the germline.
Taylor and Turnbull Page 4
Nat Rev Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2007 January 4.
UKPMC Funders Group Author Manuscript
UKPMC Funders Group Author Manuscript
Detailed studies of large patient cohorts provide invaluable information on the risk of
transmission. A recent analysis of a single, large-scale mtDNA deletion in 226 families, showed
that the risk of recurrence in the offspring of an affected mother was 4.11% (REF. 53). If the
mother was unaffected, then there was no record of affected siblings, which indicates that the
risk of recurrence is negligible.
Homoplasmic mtDNA mutations are transmitted to all maternal offspring. However, the
genetic advice given to these families is not straightforward. Most patients with LEBER
HEREDITARY OPTIC NEUROPATHY (LHON; see also Online links box) have
homoplasmic mtDNA mutations. Although all offspring inherit the mutation, only some will
develop the disease. Approximately 50% of males, but only 10% of females, develop impaired
vision54, which certainly indicates that nuclear genetic factors are important in the expression
of the disease. Another homoplasmic mtDNA mutation, the 1555A>G 12S ribosomal RNA
(RNR1) mutation55, is an important cause of post-lingual deafness. Its clinical expression
depends on the administration of amino-glycoside antibiotics, which highlights the importance
of environmental factors in the expression of homoplasmic mtDNA disease. Although it is
obvious that genetic counselling has to be tailored to specific mutations, further information
is required to determine the risk for individual defects.
The transmission of heteroplasmic mtDNA point mutations is even more complex. Nuclear
genetic56 and environmental factors almost certainly affect expression of the disease
phenotype. In addition, there is a GENETIC BOTTLENECK during development, and the
amount of mutated mtDNA that is transmitted to the offspring is variable57 (FIG. 3). Because
many of the clinical features depend on the relative proportions of mutated versus wild-type
mtDNA, the outcome for each pregnancy remains difficult to predict58.
Clinical features of human mtDNA disease
Mitochondria are vital components of all nucleated cells. Therefore, it is not surprising that
mtDNA diseases affect many tissues and that the clinical features are so variable (BOX 1).
Such diversity makes it difficult to define the impact of mtDNA mutations on human health,
however, stratifying the clinical features into the following groups defines the extent of the
problem: classic mtDNA syndromes, clinical syndromes with a high risk of mtDNA mutations,
involvement in common disease phenotypes and mtDNA as a predisposition for common
disease and ageing.
Box 1 | Common features of mitochondrial DNA-associated diseases
Adult
• Neurological: migraine | strokes | epilepsy | dementia | myopathy | peripheral neuropathy
| DIPLOPIA | ATAXIA | speech disturbances | sensorineural deafness
• Gastrointestinal: constipation | irritable bowel | DYSPHAGIA
• Cardiac: heart failure | heart block | cardiomyopathy
• Respiratory: respiratory failure | nocturnal hypoventilation | recurrent aspiration |
pneumonia
• Endocrinal: diabetes | thyroid disease | parathyroid disease | ovarian failure
• Ophthalmological: optic atrophy | cataract | ophthalmoplegia | PTOSIS
Paediatric
Taylor and Turnbull Page 5
Nat Rev Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2007 January 4.
UKPMC Funders Group Author Manuscript
UKPMC Funders Group Author Manuscript
• Neurological: epilepsy | myopathy | psychomotor retardation | ataxia | spasticity |
DYSTONIA | sensorineural deafness
• Gastrointestinal: vomiting | failure to thrive | dysphagia
• Cardiac: biventricular hypertrophic cardiomyopathy | rhythm abnormalities
• Respiratory: central hypoventilation | apnoea
• Haematological: anaemia | PANCYTOPAENIA
• Renal: renal tubular defects
• Liver: hepatic failure
• Endocrinal: diabetes | adrenal failure
• Ophthalmological: optic atrophy
DIPLOPIA
Double vision; derived from the Greek diplous, meaning double, and ops, meaning
eye.
ATAXIA
The loss of the ability to coordinate muscular movement.
DYSPHAGIA
A difficulty in swallowing.
PTOSIS
The abnormal lowering or drooping of the upper eyelid that is caused by muscle
weakness.
DYSTONIA
A neurological movement disorder that is characterized by involuntary muscle
contractions that might cause twisting or jerking movements of the body.
PANCYTOPAENIA
A deficiency of all blood cells including red cells, white cells and platelets.
OPHTHALMOPLEGIA
Weakness of one or more of the muscles that control eye movement.
PEARSON SYNDROME
A severe disease during infancy that affects bone marrow and pancreas function
owing to large-scale rearrangements of the mitochondrial genome.
Clinical features are specific and clinical diagnosis is straightforward for patients with the
classic syndromes. However, in many patients, the clinical symptoms might be non-specific
and mtDNA disease is only one of several possible diagnoses. Important clues to a possible
mitochondrial origin for the symptoms include a maternal family history and the
involvement of several tissues (BOX 2). For a large number of patients, diagnosis depends
on the results of several lines of investigation. This includes histochemical and biochemical
studies to determine the precise nature of the respiratory chain defect, analysis of the
mitochondrial genome for common mutations and, finally, complete genome sequencing
to look for rare or novel mutations59. The mitochondrial genome is highly variable and the
ease of whole-genome sequencing does not resolve some diagnostic dilemmas because the
Taylor and Turnbull Page 6
Nat Rev Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2007 January 4.
UKPMC Funders Group Author Manuscript
UKPMC Funders Group Author Manuscript
interpretation of a novel sequence change can be difficult in relation to potential
pathogenicity60. Accurate diagnosis of an mtDNA defect is essential because of the
consequences for both the patient and the family members.
Classic syndromes
Genetic defects of the human mitochondrial genome were first described in 1988 (REFS 61,62
) and arose from the investigation of two syndromes — Kearns–Sayre syndrome (KSS) and
LHON. In KSS, single, large-scale mtDNA deletions (usually sporadic) were detected in
muscle biopsies, and mitochondrial ultrastructural and cytochemical abnormalities in the
muscle were apparent. For LHON, a strict maternal pattern of inheritance was evident and
point mutations involving the ND family of genes that encode subunits of complex I were
identified. Since 1988, several mutations63 of the mitochondrial genome have been identified
and associated with disease (TABLE 2).
Clinical syndromes that have a high probability of mitochondrial DNA involvement
Over the past decade, we have become aware of several clinical syndromes that might be
associated with mtDNA mutations. The increasing recognition of mtDNA involvement in
disease is partially due to the relative ease of sequencing the mitochondrial genome, although
defining pathogenicity of specific base substitutions can be difficult60. Examples of such
diseases include progressive external OPHTHALMOPLEGIA64, PEARSON
SYNDROME65, LEIGH SYNDROME66,67 (see also Online links box), exercise-induced
muscle pain, fatigue and RHABDOMYOLYSIS68 (see also Online links box), and amino-
glycoside-induced hearing loss55. For some of these conditions, such as progressive external
ophthalmoplegia, mtDNA disease is the most likely cause, whereas in others, such as Leigh
syndrome, there is a long list of potential genetic causes.
Involvement in common disease phenotypes
The principal difficulty for clinicians is that patients with mtDNA disease rarely have a classic
phenotype and mtDNA enters into the differential diagnosis of many common clinical
syndromes. A good example of a common condition in which mtDNA is a potential cause is
diabetes, the most common metabolic disease to affect humans69. mtDNA disease certainly
is associated with diabetes, but these patients represent a tiny proportion of those affected with
diabetes70–72. Because several mtDNA mutations cause diabetes63 it is clearly impractical
and uneconomical to screen all patients with diabetes for causative mutations. From the list of
common clinical features seen in patients with mtDNA disease (BOX 1), it is obvious that it
is difficult to decide which patients to investigate for possible mtDNA disease. Further
difficulties in this area have been highlighted by a recent report that describes a clear association
between members of a large family that harbour a homoplasmic mitochondrial tRNA mutation
and a metabolic syndrome that is characterized by hypertension, hypomagnesaemia and
hypercholesterolaemia9. Because conditions such as hypertension and hyperc-holesterolaemia
affect many individuals73, the number of patients with mtDNA disease is potentially very high.
However, it must be kept in the context that most reports describe isolated families. In
epidemiological surveys of populations74, the incidence of mtDNA mutations within a specific
disease phenotype75 is small. Other factors that make the diagnosis of mtDNA difficult include
the specific combination of clinical symptoms (BOX 2); for example, mitochondrial diabetes
is often accompanied by deafness70, and stroke-like episodes are usually associated with
migraine-like symptoms. There is no doubt that many patients with mtDNA mutations go
undiagnosed for years and many are probably never recognized. Increased awareness among
physicians and paediatricians is important, as is the investigation of patients in specialist centres
that are able to provide a complete range of diagnostic tests.
Taylor and Turnbull Page 7
Nat Rev Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2007 January 4.
UKPMC Funders Group Author Manuscript
UKPMC Funders Group Author Manuscript
Box 2 | Guidelines for the recognition of patients with mitochondrial DNA disease
A list of the clinical guidelines that have been generated from our experience of
invesbtigating and managing patients with mtDNA mutations.
• Maternal inheritance
• Recognition of classic syndromes; for example, mitochondrial myopathy, encephalopathy,
lactic acidosis and stroke-like episodes (MELAS) or chronic progressive external
ophthalmoplegia (CPEO)
• Recognition of characteristic clinical features; for example, biventricular cardiac
hypertrophy
• Involvement of many organ systems; for example, diabetes and deafness
• Specific combinations of symptoms; for example, strokes and migraine and seizures and
ataxia
• Abnormal clinical or laboratory investigations; for example, lactic acidaemia in children,
characteristic magnetic-resonance-imaging findings, abnormal muscle biopsy that is
associated with RAGGED-RED FIBRES or cytochrome c oxidase-deficient fibres
LEIGH SYNDROME
A disease that affects the brainstem and basal ganglia and is characterised by
defects in mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation.
RHABDOMYOLYSIS
The breakdown of muscle fibres owing to injury, toxins or metabolic disease,
which leads to high concentrations of myoglobin in both plasma and urine
RAGGED3RED FIBRES
The pathological hallmark of mtDNA disease that is characterized by the
subsarcolemmal accumulation of abnormal mitochondria in the muscle fibre,
which stains red with a Gomori trichrome stain.
Mitochondrial DNA variants as a predisposition for common disease
There has been considerable interest in the possibility that mtDNA variants might predispose
to common diseases; for example, diabetes, Alzheimer disease (AD) and Parkinson disease
(PD)76. The known association of diabetes with mtDNA mutations and the involvement of
reactive oxygen species in the aetiology of AD and PD has encouraged a large number of
studies. The first approach involves identifying candidate pathogenic mutations by comparing
mtDNA sequences between patients and control groups. Unfortunately, interpreting the results
is limited by the relatively small number of individual mtDNA sequences in each group and
by the high mutation rate of mtDNA, which results in a high frequency of rare variants or
private polymorphisms77. Some variants are more common than others. For example, the
16189 variant, a variable length polycytosine tract in the non-coding control region, has been
associated with several late-onset, multifactorial disorders, including susceptibility to
cardiomyopathy78 and type 2 diabetes79, and has been proposed to affect mtDNA
replication79. However, because this variant occurs frequently within the population, concerns
arise (that are similar to the ‘haplogroup’ studies) over the control cohorts that are chosen for
such population-based surveys. Human populations can be divided into several mtDNA
haplogroups that are based on specific SNPs, reflecting mutations accumulated by a discrete
maternal lineage80. Therefore, haplogroup association studies have been used to define the
Taylor and Turnbull Page 8
Nat Rev Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2007 January 4.
UKPMC Funders Group Author Manuscript
UKPMC Funders Group Author Manuscript
role of mtDNA mutations in complex diseases. In this approach, disease and control mtDNA
sequence sets are assigned to haplo-groups, and the distribution of haplogroups is compared.
A significant difference is interpreted to indicate that the mtDNA ‘background’ has an effect
on expression or penetrance of the clinical abnormalities. Various results have been reported
for both AD and PD81–84. Given the inconsistency among different studies, it is difficult to
conclude unequivocally that the risk of either PD or AD is influenced by mitochondrial
haplogroups. Some of the inconsistency could be due to population-substructure differences
between disease and control groups. It is difficult to ‘match’ groups, even when one tries to
control nationality and ethnicity85.
CYTOPLAST
An enucleated donor cell that contains patient mitochondria and that is used to
generate cybrid fusions.
Models of mitochondrial DNA disease
The inability to genetically engineer or transform the mitochondrial genome in vitro or in
vivo has severely hampered efforts to study the relationship between mtDNA genotype and
clinical phenotype in animal models that bear heteroplasmic, pathogenic mtDNA mutations.
Despite this, much has been learned of the biochemical and cellular consequences of specific
mtDNA mutations through the generation of transmitochondrial cytoplasmic cybrid cells. In
this system, immortalized human cell lines that have been completely depleted of their
endogenous mtDNA (ρ° cells) are repopulated with exogenous, patient mitochondria. As ρ°
cells have no functional respiratory chain and are dependent on pyruvate and uridine for growth,
the loss of either of these two metabolic requirements can be used to select for transformants
that harbour complementing (exogenous) mtDNA86. This elegant system allows the functional
and physiological consequences of different levels of heteroplasmy of certain mtDNA
mutations to be tested87,88. In addition, it has also proved useful in determining the genetic
origin of certain mitochondrial disorders89,90, the effect of nuclear background on the
segregation of pathogenic mtDNA mutations91 and in identifying the first tRNA suppressor
mutation in human mitochondria92. It has also been used to test rational, genetic therapies and
more recently, to demonstrate the presence of heterologous mtDNA recombination in human
cells44.
The generation of heteroplasmic mice that harbour pathogenic mtDNA mutations was
frustratingly difficult. Heteroplasmic mice were first generated by fusing zygotes that carried
one mtDNA haplotype with enucleated embryos that carried a different haplotype93,94,
although these mice (BALB and NZB) harboured only neutral mtDNA variants. Further
advances were made with the generation of chimeric, heteroplasmic chloramphenicol resistant
(CAPR) mice, which could transmit mtDNA mutations to subsequent generations and showed
signs of mitochondrial dysfunction95,96. By fusing CYTOPLASTS that harbour high levels
of a somatic mtDNA rearrangement to one-cell embryos, Hayashi and colleagues generated a
model that has a pathogenic deletion or duplication97 of the mitochondrial genome, which was
transmitted through the germ line. These mice showed muscle and cardiac defects, but also,
more prominently, renal failure together with lactic acidosis, anaemia and a mosaic distribution
of COX deficiency. Human mtDNA-rearrangement mutations rarely result in renal disease, so
this experiment highlighted the potential for species-specific symptoms and signs. Although
subsequent studies that use this mouse model have improved our understanding of
mitochondrial segregation and disease pathogenesis98, no reported studies specifically address
the development of potential therapies.
The generation of mouse models that target nuclear genes involved in mtDNA maintenance or
replication, such as the Tfam knockout mouse, has proved to be a more successful
approach99–103. Using the Cre-loxP recombination system, Larsson and colleagues disrupted
Taylor and Turnbull Page 9
Nat Rev Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2007 January 4.
UKPMC Funders Group Author Manuscript
UKPMC Funders Group Author Manuscript
the Tfam gene in selected mouse tissues, yielding models that provide clues to potentially
important factors in the development of specific clinical features associated with mtDNA
disease. For example, the mice generated by the postnatal disruption of Tfam in neurons of the
hippocampus and neocortex develop a late-onset neurodegeneration, but there is minimal cell
loss until the mice developed seizures101. This finding indicates that stress or neuronal
discharge resulted in an acute energy crisis, which highlights the importance of management
issues such as the effective control of seizures in patients with mtDNA disease.
Management of mtDNA diseases
Although defining the clinical features and establishing the diagnosis of mtDNA disease remain
considerable challenges, the development of effective curative treatment is also a challenging
hurdle for experimental scientists. However, there are important issues associated with the
clinical management of patients and many of these issues have recently been discussed104.
Early detection of treatable symptoms is crucial.
SATELLITE CELLS
Quiescent cells that are located between the basal lamina and the plasmalemma of the
muscle fibre, and are a main contributor to postnatal muscle growth.
ALLOTOPIC EXPRESSION
The expression of a gene in a different cellular compartment to its target location. In
the context described here, it is the recoding of a mitochondrial gene to allow it to be
expressed in the nucleus. The subsequent conjugation of a mitochondrial-targeting
sequence promotes import and localization of the gene product to the organelle.
AMNIOCENTESIS
An aspiration of cells from the amniotic sac, using a needle, for biochemical and
genetic analysis.
CHORIONIC VILLUS BIOPSY
A placental biopsy that is carried out in early pregnancy to collect fetal tissue for
genetic and biochemical analysis.
POLAR BODY
A small haploid cell that is produced during oogenesis and that does not develop into
a functional ovum.
Mitochondrial DNA mutation levels can be manipulated through exercise
In healthy individuals, lack of exercise (deconditioning) leads to an overall reduction in
mitochondrial enzyme activity, whereas endurance training improves enzyme activity.
Resistance training or muscle necrosis stimulates the incorporation of SATELLITE CELLS
into existing muscle fibres105,106. It is postulated that for sporadic mutations, resistance
training might lead to an overall reduction in the proportion of mutated mtDNA versus wild-
type, as satellite cells contain a low or negligible amount of mutated mtDNA106,107.
Endurance training might therefore improve function by increasing wild-type mtDNA levels.
However, there are concerns that mutated mtDNA might be preferentially amplified, and that
this increase might become clinically relevant after deconditioning105,108. Studies are
currently underway to address both the improvements and the concerns arising from these
earlier reports.
Taylor and Turnbull Page 10
Nat Rev Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2007 January 4.
UKPMC Funders Group Author Manuscript
UKPMC Funders Group Author Manuscript
New avenues for treatment of mitochondrial diseases
The polyploid nature of the mitochondrial genome, the phenomenon of heteroplasmy, the
inability to deliver potentially therapeutic nucleic acids to the organelle through mitochondrial
transfection, and the slow realization of appropriate animal models of mtDNA disease are the
main problems for the development of gene-based treatments. Despite these, several strategies
that seek to rescue mitochondrial function through complementation of the genetic defect or
direct manipulation of the levels of mutated mtDNA have been considered.
One way of complementing a dysfunctional mitochondrial protein is through ALLOTOPIC
EXPRESSION. Using this approach, it was possible to express the wild-type ATPase 6 protein
allotopically from nucleus-transfected constructs in transmitochondrial cybrid cells that were
homoplasmic for the 8993T>G MTATP6 (subunit 6 of mitochondrial ATP synthase) mutation
(which causes neurogenic weakness, ataxia and retinitis pigmentosa (NARP) syndrome) and
demonstrate a partial rescue of the biochemical defect109. A similar strategy has been used to
express a modified NADH dehydrogenase subunit 4 (ND4) gene to complement the 11778G>A
mutation that causes LHON110. To complement mitochondrial tRNA defects, an alternative
approach has been proposed. Yeast cytosolic tRNALysCUU (tK1) and similar derivatives can
be imported into isolated human mitochondria if the tRNA is amino-acylated and supplied with
soluble factors, including lysl-tRNA synthetases111. Using transmitochondrial cybrid cells
and primary human fibroblasts that carry the 8344A>G TRNK (a tRNA gene) mutation, which
causes myoclonic epilepsy and ragged-red fibres (MERRF) syndrome, it has recently been
shown that the imported tRNALys is correctly amino-acylated and able to participate in
mitochondrial translation, partially rescuing mitochondrial function112.
Because the recessive nature of many pathogenic mutations dictates that a small percentage of
the wild-type genotype is protective, a minor adjustment to the balance of mutated to wild-
type genomes in favour of the wild type could improve both biochemical function and resolve
the clinical problem. The selective inhibition of mutated mtDNA replication by antigenomic
agents has been applied to manipulate mtDNA heteroplasmy113. Another strategy involves
targeting the organelle with restriction endonucleases that, by differentiating between mtDNA
genotypes, can cause the preferential elimination of the mutated genotype and propagation of
the wild-type genotype114,115. Pharmacological approaches to shift mtDNA heteroplasmy
are also being investigated. Oligomycin, an irreversible inhibitor of mitochondrial ATP
synthase, has been used to increase the fraction of wild-type molecules in cells that harbour
the 8933T>G MTATP6 mutation under culture conditions (using galactose as the sole carbon
source) that specifically select for the wild-type molecule116. This culture medium could also
selectively kill cells that are homoplasmic for a common (4,977-bp deletion) mtDNA
rearrangement — the molecular abnormality in many patients with KSS. In this case, a
ketogenic medium has been used to shift the heteroplasmy of cells that contain a mixture of
wild-type and partially deleted mtDNAs117. Finally, the revelation that overexpressing
mitochondrial Tu translation elongation factor, TUFM, in yeast mutant counterparts of
TRNL1 (a tRNA gene) MELAS (mitochondrial myopathy, encephalopathy, lactic acidosis and
stroke-like episodes) mutations facilitates the rescue of the respiratory defect might have
implications for human disease-related mutations118.
Prevention of transmission of mtDNA disease
Improving genetic advice
The question often asked by both families and clinicians is whether there are any prospects for
providing either better guidance for families or even preventing the transmission of mtDNA
disease. AMNIOCENTESIS and CHORIONIC VILLUS BIOPSY are widely used to diagnose
autosomal and chromosomal abnormalities, and might be of value in heteroplasmic mtDNA
Taylor and Turnbull Page 11
Nat Rev Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2007 January 4.
UKPMC Funders Group Author Manuscript
UKPMC Funders Group Author Manuscript
disorders. Chorionic villus biopsy has been used in some families that have heteroplasmic
mtDNA disorders, where the results have influenced the clinical management119–121. In
many heteroplasmic mtDNA64,122 disorders there are marked tissue-specific differences in
the level of heteroplasmy, and therefore a reasonable concern is whether a prenatal sample will
reflect the likely outcome for the fetus. The present evidence indicates that this should not be
a problem94,123. Preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) allows either analysis of mtDNA
from the POLAR BODY of unfertilized oocytes, or from one to two single cells that are taken
from 8-cell embryos, followed by the implantation of healthy embryos. The potential value of
this technique is obvious, but there is little reported information of its application in patients
with mtDNA mutations. The high number of mitochondrial genomes within oocytes124
indicates that PGD should be feasible for mtDNA disease. Experiments in heteroplasmic mice
have shown the levels of heteroplasmy to be virtually identical between the ooplasm and polar
body of the mature oocyte and also between blastomeres of each of the 2-, 4-, and 6–8-cell
embryo125.
GERMINAL VESICLE
A stage during oocyte maturation in which the oocyte nucleus is located close to the
surface of the egg cell and is clearly visible.
Alternative strategies associated with oocyte manipulation
Development of new strategies to prevent the transmission of mtDNA is a very important aspect
of disease management. An obvious method to prevent the transmission of an mtDNA mutation
to the offspring is oocyte donation. However, although the oocyte would be fertilized using
the father’s sperm, the child would have the nuclear genotype of the donor female, a less-than-
ideal option for many mothers. Cytoplasmic transfer involves the transfer of normal
mitochondria into the abnormal oocyte to dilute the effect of any mtDNA defect126.
Cytoplasmic transfer between human oocytes has been carried out to improve the outcome of
assisted reproduction methods127. The effectiveness of this procedure is uncertain128, but
some of the children born were heteroplasmic with low levels of mtDNA from the donor
oocyte129. However, despite the observation that changes in heteroplasmy can occur, it is
likely that this technique will have limited value for patients with mtDNA disease, as mouse
experiments indicate that the amount of mtDNA that can be transferred is relatively
small130.
Alternatively, nuclear chromosomes from an oocyte that contains mutated mtDNA could be
transferred to an enucleated oocyte from a normal female131. This method has obvious
advantages: the offspring will be genetically related to both parents and the chances of
achieving very low levels of mutated mtDNA in the oocyte are high. However, important
technical and ethical or legal issues make progress in this area difficult, principally because
the technique involves the genetic manipulation of fertilized oocytes. To overcome these issues,
the transfer could be carried out at different stages of oocyte maturation, although transfer from
mature unfertilized oocytes is difficult because of the serious risk of aneuploidy that is due to
chromosome loss during transfer or due to missegregation following the disruption of the
meiotic spindle. Karyoplast transfer of the GERMINAL VESICLE between oocytes might be
possible before in vitro maturation and subsequent fertilization (FIG. 4). However, although
maturation and fertilization of normal germinal-vesicle-stage oocytes has been achieved with
both mouse132–134 and human oocytes135,136, these methods are very inefficient.
Pronuclear-stage transfer is possibly more feasible because human pronuclear oocytes can be
manipulated to generate normal offspring137 and because this technique is feasible in the
mouse138,139.
Taylor and Turnbull Page 12
Nat Rev Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2007 January 4.
UKPMC Funders Group Author Manuscript
UKPMC Funders Group Author Manuscript
Acquired mtDNA mutations in ageing and cancer
Mitochondrial theory of ageing
The mitochondrial theory of ageing proposes that progressive accumulation of somatic
mutations in mtDNA during a lifetime leads to an inevitable decline in mitochondrial
function140. The most important biochemical factors in this process are considered to be
reactive oxygen species (ROS), which are generated at very low levels during the normal
function of the mitochondrial respiratory chain. It has been proposed that ROS can cause
somatic mutations in mtDNA140. These mutations then result in impaired function of the
respiratory chain, leading to increased ROS production and the subsequent accumulation of
more mutations. There is evidence that some pathogenic mutations, such as at 8993T>G, lead
to increased ROS production141; interestingly, for 8993T>G, free radical-mediated inhibition
of OXPHOS can be restored by antioxidants142. The ROS vicious cycle is believed to account
for an exponential increase in oxidative damage during ageing, which results in the eventual
loss of cellular and tissue functions through a combination of energy insufficiency, signalling
defects, apoptosis and replicative senescence.
Studies in human and mouse models
Although the mitochondrial theory of ageing was first suggested in the 1950s, the first
convincing evidence of a biochemical defect in humans was the detection of COX-deficient
cells in ageing post-mitotic tissues143 (FIG. 2). These cells had identical characteristics to
those found in patients with inherited mitochondrial disease37. Surprisingly, these cells show
the clonal expansion of an individual mutation, which is often an mtDNA rearrangement, rather
than many individual mtDNA mutations144,145. In addition, studies from patients showed
that, in the presence of many mtDNA genomes within a cell, the mutation is functionally
recessive and a threshold effect is observed37. More recently, mtDNA mutations were found
to accumulate to high levels in dividing cells and presumably stem cells39,146, and cause an
observable biochemical defect39.
GENETIC DRIFT
Changes in the frequency of a genetic variant in a population owing to chance alone.
How a mutation in an individual genome can clonally expand to high levels in individual cells
is a crucial question. So far, several theories have been proposed, including the selective
replication of mutated mtDNA, the longevity of mitochondria that contain mutated mtDNA
and the ‘sick mitochondrion’ hypothesis (with preferential replication of mitochondria that
have impaired OXPHOS activities and higher mutant load)147–149. However, mathematical-
modelling studies have also indicated that this process might occur by GENETIC
DRIFT150.
Studies from ageing humans and animal models showed good correlation between ageing and
the presence of mtDNA mutations. To test the mitochondrial ageing hypothesis, knock-in mice
expressing a proofreading-deficient version of PolgA were developed10. These mice acquire
mtDNA mutations at a higher rate than is normal because the introduction of a point mutation
into the exonuclease region of the PolgA gene drastically reduces its proof-reading exonuclease
activity. The phenotype of the PolgA mutator mouse has many hallmarks of premature ageing,
including a characteristic hunched appearance that is indicative of osteoporosis, reduced
activity, severe weight loss with virtually no remaining adipose tissue and a marked reduction
in muscle mass. Although this study provides strong evidence that somatic mtDNA mutations
contribute to ageing, further experiments are required to confirm that somatic mtDNA
mutations are causal in the ageing process.
Taylor and Turnbull Page 13
Nat Rev Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2007 January 4.
UKPMC Funders Group Author Manuscript
UKPMC Funders Group Author Manuscript
Mitochondrial DNA mutations and cancer
In a landmark paper in 1998, Vogelstein and colleagues reported that mtDNA mutations were
present in 7 out of 10 colorectal cancer cell lines that were studied151. Although these mtDNA
mutations were somatic and absent in other patient tissues, many were homoplasmic in the
tumour tissue. Since then, numerous other studies have documented the presence of somatic
mtDNA mutations in both solid tumours and leukaemias152–156. How these mutations
accumulate to high levels in individual tumours is still unclear, although both modelling and
molecular studies indicate that they possibly accumulate without selection38,39. In addition,
there is no evidence of whether mtDNA mutations themselves contribute to the development
of the tumour. Original work on colorectal tumours showed that many of the mutations detected
were not associated with a mitochondrial defect. Moreover, some of the mutations seen in other
tumours are recognized polymorphic variants151. Therefore, although a direct link between
the presence of the mtDNA mutation and the development of the tumour has not been made,
the presence of a mtDNA mutation might prove significant in the detection of tumour
recurrence152 and possibly in the detection of genotoxic damage157.
Conclusions and future prospects
It is nearly 25 years since Sanger and colleagues sequenced the human mitochondrial genome,
and significant progress in the mitochondrial field continues to be made. Our understanding
of the pathogenesis of mtDNA disease will greatly improve by studying the basic processes
involved in replication, transcription and translation of the mitochondrial genome.
Unequivocally, mtDNA mutations are an important cause of genetic disease. The clinical
variability of these disorders makes the recognition of patients with mtDNA disease a real
challenge. Clinicians must be aware of its impact; accurate diagnosis requires a combination
of different studies and should be carried out in specialist centres. Although the most
disappointing area has been the lack of treatment for patients with mtDNA disease, several
new experimental approaches are currently under investigation. It is crucial that further work
and ideas are forthcoming to realistically treat or prevent the transmission of mtDNA disease
to future generations. The involvement of mtDNA mutations in neurodegenerative disease,
ageing and cancer is under debate. Although the development of an animal model should clarify
a possible role of mtDNA mutations in ageing, further work in both human tissues and animal
models is required to explain the role of mtDNA in these areas of medicine.
Acknowledgements
The authors work is supported by the Wellcome Trust, Medical Research Centre, Alzheimer’s Research Trust,
Muscular Dystrophy Campaign, Newcastle upon Tyne Hospitals NHS Trust and the European Union (FP6,
EUmitocombat). We thank R.N. Lightowlers, N. Howell, R. McFarland and M. Herbert for valuable input, and L.
Craven and M. Barron for help with the figures.
References
1. Zeviani M, Di Donato S. Mitochondrial disorders. Brain 2004;127:2153–2172. [PubMed: 15358637]
2. Ivanov PL, et al. Mitochondrial DNA sequence heteroplasmy in the Grand Duke of Russia Georgij
Romanov establishes the authenticity of the remains of Tsar Nicholas II. Nature Genet 1996;12:417–
420. [PubMed: 8630496]
3. Anderson S, et al. Sequence and organization of the human mitochondrial genome. Nature
1981;290:457–465. [PubMed: 7219534]This paper describes the sequence and organization of human
mtDNA — the first complete mitochondrial genome to be sequenced.
4. Bibb MJ, Van Etten RA, Wright CT, Walberg MW, Clayton DA. Sequence and gene organization of
mouse mitochondrial DNA. Cell 1981;26:167–180. [PubMed: 7332926]
Taylor and Turnbull Page 14
Nat Rev Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2007 January 4.
UKPMC Funders Group Author Manuscript
UKPMC Funders Group Author Manuscript
5. Anderson S, et al. Complete sequence of bovine mitochondrial DNA. Conserved features of the
mammalian mitochondrial genome. J Mol Biol 1982;156:683–717. [PubMed: 7120390]
6. Andrews RM, et al. Reanalysis and revision of the Cambridge reference sequence for human
mitochondrial DNA. Nature Genet 1999;23:147. [PubMed: 10508508]A re-analysis of the original
human placental DNA sample used by Fred Sanger and colleagues, using automated, fluorescent DNA
sequencing, which allowed a consensus human mtDNA sequence (the ‘revised Cambridge Reference
Sequence’) to be made available.
7. Majamaa K, et al. Epidemiology of A3243G, the mutation for mitochondrial encephalomyopathy,
lactic acidosis, and strokelike episodes: prevalence of the mutation in an adult population. Am J Hum
Genet 1998;63:447–454. [PubMed: 9683591]
8. Schaefer AM, Taylor RW, Turnbull DM, Chinnery PF. The epidemiology of mitochondrial disorders
— past, present and future. Biochim Biophys Acta 2004;1659:115–120. [PubMed: 15576042]
9. Wilson FH, et al. A cluster of metabolic defects caused by mutation in a mitochondrial tRNA. Science
2004;306:1190–1194. [PubMed: 15498972]
10. Trifunovic A, et al. Premature ageing in mice expressing defective mitochondrial DNA polymerase.
Nature 2004;429:417–423. [PubMed: 15164064]This report describes a knock-in mouse model that
expresses a proof-reading-deficient version of PolgA, the catalytic subunit of mtDNA polymerase,
and provides the first in vivo data in mammals to establish a causative link between mtDNA mutations
and ageing phenotypes.
11. Muller-Hocker J. Cytochrome c oxidase deficient fibres in the limb muscle and diaphragm of man
without muscular disease: an age-related alteration. J Neurol Sci 1990;100:14–21. [PubMed:
1965203]
12. Mootha VK, et al. PGC-1α-responsive genes involved in oxidative phosphorylation are coordinately
downregulated in human diabetes. Nature Genet 2003;34:267–273. [PubMed: 12808457]
13. Petersen KF, et al. Mitochondrial dysfunction in the elderly: possible role in insulin resistance. Science
2003;300:1140–1142. [PubMed: 12750520]
14. DiMauro S, Schon EA. Mitochondrial respiratory-chain diseases. N Engl J Med 2003;348:2656–
2668. [PubMed: 12826641]
15. Shoubridge EA. Nuclear genetic defects of oxidative phosphorylation. Hum Mol Genet
2001;10:2277–2284. [PubMed: 11673411]
16. Lang BF, Gray MW, Burger G. Mitochondrial genome evolution and the origin of eukaryotes. Annu
Rev Genet 1999;33:351–397. [PubMed: 10690412]
17. Korhonen JA, Pham XH, Pellegrini M, Falkenberg M. Reconstitution of a minimal mtDNA replisome
in vitro. EMBO J 2004;23:2423–2429. [PubMed: 15167897]
18. Carrodeguas JA, Theis K, Bogenhagen DF, Kisker C. Crystal structure and deletion analysis show
that the accessory subunit of mammalian DNA polymerase-γ, Pol-γB, functions as a homodimer.
Mol Cell 2001;7:43–54. [PubMed: 11172710]
19. Spelbrink JN, et al. Human mitochondrial DNA deletions associated with mutations in the gene
encoding Twinkle, a phage T7 gene 4-like protein localized in mitochondria. Nature Genet
2001;28:223–231. [PubMed: 11431692]
20. Clayton DA. Replication of animal mitochondrial DNA. Cell 1982;28:693–705. [PubMed: 6178513]
This paper outlines the strand-displacement model of mammalian mtDNA replication, in which the
two strands of mtDNA are each replicated in a continuous fashion from widely separated origins,
requiring extensive displacement of parental DNA strands during leading-strand synthesis.
21. Holt IJ, Lorimer HE, Jacobs HT. Coupled leading- and lagging-strand synthesis of mammalian
mitochondrial DNA. Cell 2000;100:515–524. [PubMed: 10721989]Using two-dimensional agarose
gel electrophoresis, the demonstration of duplex replication intermediates led the authors to propose
a further mechanism for mammalian mtDNA replication that involves strand-coupled synthesis.
22. Yang MY, et al. Biased incorporation of ribonucleotides on the mitochondrial L-strand accounts for
apparent strand-asymmetric DNA replication. Cell 2002;111:495–505. [PubMed: 12437923]
23. Bowmaker M, et al. Mammalian mitochondrial DNA replicates bidirectionally from an initiation
zone. J Biol Chem 2003;278:50961–50969. [PubMed: 14506235]
24. Bogenhagen DF, Clayton DA. The mitochondrial DNA replication bubble has not burst. Trends
Biochem Sci 2003;28:357–360. [PubMed: 12878002]
Taylor and Turnbull Page 15
Nat Rev Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2007 January 4.
UKPMC Funders Group Author Manuscript
UKPMC Funders Group Author Manuscript
25. Holt IJ, Jacobs HT. Response: The mitochondrial DNA replication bubble has not burst. Trends
Biochem Sci 2003;28:355–356. [PubMed: 12878001]
26. Bogenhagen DF, Clayton DA. Concluding remarks: The mitochondrial DNA replication bubble has
not burst. Trends Biochem Sci 2003;28:404–405. [PubMed: 12932727]
27. Fish J, Raule N, Attardi G. Discovery of a major D-loop replication origin reveals two modes of
human mtDNA synthesis. Science 2004;306:2098–2101. [PubMed: 15604407]
28. Gaspari M, Larsson NG, Gustafsson CM. The transcription machinery in mammalian mitochondria.
Biochim Biophys Acta 2004;1659:148–152. [PubMed: 15576046]
29. Clayton DA. Replication and transcription of vertebrate mitochondrial DNA. Annu Rev Cell Biol
1991;7:453–478. [PubMed: 1809353]
30. Ojala D, Montoya J, Attardi G. tRNA punctuation model of RNA processing in human mitochondria.
Nature 1981;290:470–474. [PubMed: 7219536]
31. Falkenberg M, et al. Mitochondrial transcription factors B1 and B2 activate transcription of human
mtDNA. Nature Genet 2002;31:289–294. [PubMed: 12068295]
32. Fernandez-Silva P, Enriquez JA, Montoya J. Replication and transcription of mammalian
mitochondrial DNA. Exp Physiol 2003;88:41–56. [PubMed: 12525854]
33. Gaspari M, Falkenberg M, Larsson NG, Gustafsson CM. The mitochondrial RNA polymerase
contributes critically to promoter specificity in mammalian cells. EMBO J 2004;23:4606–4614.
[PubMed: 15526033]
34. Jacobs HT. Disorders of mitochondrial protein synthesis. Hum Mol Genet 2003;12:R293–R301.
[PubMed: 12928485]
35. Miller C, et al. Defective mitochondrial translation caused by a ribosomal protein (MRPS16) mutation.
Ann Neurol 2004;56:734–738. [PubMed: 15505824]
36. Coenen MJ, et al. Mutant mitochondrial elongation factor G1 and combined oxidative
phosphorylation deficiency. N Engl J Med 2004;351:2080–2086. [PubMed: 15537906]
37. Sciacco M, Bonilla E, Schon EA, DiMauro S, Moraes CT. Distribution of wild-type and common
deletion forms of mtDNA in normal and respiration-deficient muscle fibers from patients with
mitochondrial myopathy. Hum Mol Genet 1994;3:13–19. [PubMed: 8162014]A study of individual
muscle fibres from patients with mitochondrial myopathy caused by large-scale mtDNA
rearrangements revealed that, in addition to levels of deleted mtDNA that are above a critical
threshold, respiratory-deficient fibres exhibit a marked reduction in the absolute amount of wild-type
mtDNA.
38. Coller HA, et al. High frequency of homoplasmic mitochondrial DNA mutations in human tumors
can be explained without selection. Nature Genet 2001;28:147–150. [PubMed: 11381261]
39. Taylor RW, et al. Mitochondrial DNA mutations in human colonic crypt stem cells. J Clin Invest
2003;112:1351–1360. [PubMed: 14597761]
40. Giles RE, Blanc H, Cann HM, Wallace DC. Maternal inheritance of human mitochondrial DNA. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 1980;77:6715–6719. [PubMed: 6256757]
41. Gyllensten U, Wharton D, Josefsson A, Wilson AC. Paternal inheritance of mitochondrial DNA in
mice. Nature 1991;352:255–257. [PubMed: 1857422]
42. Shitara H, Hayashi JI, Takahama S, Kaneda H, Yonekawa H. Maternal inheritance of mouse mtDNA
in interspecific hybrids: segregation of the leaked paternal mtDNA followed by the prevention of
subsequent paternal leakage. Genetics 1998;148:851–857. [PubMed: 9504930]
43. Awadalla P, Eyre-Walker A, Smith JM. Linkage disequilibrium and recombination in hominid
mitochondrial DNA. Science 1999;286:2524–2525. [PubMed: 10617471]
44. D’Aurelio M, et al. Heterologous mitochondrial DNA recombination in human cells. Hum Mol Genet
2004;13:3171–3179. [PubMed: 15496432]
45. Kraytsberg Y, et al. Recombination of human mitochondrial DNA. Science 2004;304:981. [PubMed:
15143273]
46. Elson JL, et al. Analysis of European mtDNAs for recombination. Am J Hum Genet 2001;68:145–
153. [PubMed: 11115380]
47. Schwartz M, Vissing J. Paternal inheritance of mitochondrial DNA. N Engl J Med 2002;347:576–
580. [PubMed: 12192017]
Taylor and Turnbull Page 16
Nat Rev Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2007 January 4.
UKPMC Funders Group Author Manuscript
UKPMC Funders Group Author Manuscript
48. Taylor RW, et al. Genotypes from patients indicate no paternal mitochondrial DNA contribution.
Ann Neurol 2003;54:521–524. [PubMed: 14520666]
49. Filosto M, et al. Lack of paternal inheritance of muscle mitochondrial DNA in sporadic mitochondrial
myopathies. Ann Neurol 2003;54:524–526. [PubMed: 14520667]
50. Schwartz M, Vissing J. No evidence for paternal inheritance of mtDNA in patients with sporadic
mtDNA mutations. J Neurol Sci 2004;218:99–101. [PubMed: 14759640]
51. Danan C, et al. Evaluation of parental mitochondrial inheritance in neonates born after
intracytoplasmic sperm injection. Am J Hum Genet 1999;65:463–473. [PubMed: 10417289]
52. Marchington DR, et al. No evidence for paternal mtDNA transmission to offspring or extra-embryonic
tissues after ICSI. Mol Hum Reprod 2002;8:1046–1049. [PubMed: 12397219]
53. Chinnery PF, et al. Risk of developing a mitochondrial DNA deletion disorder. Lancet 2004;364:592–
596. [PubMed: 15313359]
54. Man PY, et al. The epidemiology of Leber hereditary optic neuropathy in the North East of England.
Am J Hum Genet 2003;72:333–339. [PubMed: 12518276]
55. Prezant TR, et al. Mitochondrial ribosomal RNA mutation associated with both antibiotic-induced
and non-syndromic deafness. Nature Genet 1993;4:289–294. [PubMed: 7689389]
56. Battersby BJ, Loredo-Osti JC, Shoubridge EA. Nuclear genetic control of mitochondrial DNA
segregation. Nature Genet 2003;33:183–186. [PubMed: 12539044]
57. Brown DT, Samuels DC, Michael EM, Turnbull DM, Chinnery PF. Random genetic drift determines
the level of mutant mtDNA in human primary oocytes. Am J Hum Genet 2000;68:533–536. [PubMed:
11133360]
58. Poulton J, Turnbull DM. 74th ENMC international workshop: mitochondrial diseases 19–20
November 1999, Naarden, the Netherlands. Neuromuscul Disord 2000;10:460–462. [PubMed:
10899455]
59. Taylor RW, Schaefer AM, Barron MJ, McFarland R, Turnbull DM. The diagnosis of mitochondrial
muscle disease. Neuromuscul Disord 2004;14:237–245. [PubMed: 15019701]
60. McFarland R, Elson JL, Taylor RW, Howell N, Turnbull DM. Assigning pathogenicity to
mitochondrial tRNA mutations: when ‘definitely maybe’ is not good enough. Trends Genet
2004;20:591–596. [PubMed: 15522452]
61. Holt IJ, Harding AE, Morgan-Hughes JA. Deletions of muscle mitochondrial DNA in patients with
mitochondrial myopathies. Nature 1988;331:717–719. [PubMed: 2830540]The first demonstration
that heteroplasmic, large-scale rearrangements of the mitochondrial genome could cause human
disease.
62. Wallace DC, et al. Mitochondrial DNA mutation associated with Leber’s hereditary optic neuropathy.
Science 1988;242:1427–1430. [PubMed: 3201231]This paper describes the first example of a single-
nucleotide change in the mitochondrial genome (11778G>A) as the cause of a maternally inherited,
neurological disorder in multiple families.
63. Brandon MC, et al. MITOMAP: a human mitochondrial genome database — 2004 update. Nucleic
Acids Res 2005;33:D611–D613. [PubMed: 15608272]
64. Moraes CT, et al. Mitochondrial DNA deletions in progressive external ophthalmoplegia and Kearns–
Sayre syndrome. N Engl J Med 1989;320:1293–1299. [PubMed: 2541333]
65. Rotig A, Cormier V, Blanche S, Bonnefont J-P, Ledeist F. Pearson’s marrow pancreas syndrome. A
multisystem mitochondrial disorder of infancy. J Clin Invest 1990;86:1601–1608. [PubMed:
2243133]
66. McFarland R, et al. De novo mutations in the mitochondrial ND3 gene as a cause of infantile
mitochondrial encephalopathy and complex I deficiency. Ann Neurol 2004;55:58–64. [PubMed:
14705112]
67. de Vries DD, van Engelen BG, Gabreels FJ, Ruitenbeek W, van Oost BA. A second missense mutation
in the mitochondrial ATPase 6 gene in Leigh’s syndrome. Ann Neurol 1993;34:410–412. [PubMed:
8395787]
68. Andreu AL, et al. Exercise intolerance due to mutations in the cytochrome b gene of mitochondrial
DNA. N Engl J Med 1999;341:1037–1044. [PubMed: 10502593]
69. Lowell BB, Shulman GI. Mitochondrial dysfunction and type 2 diabetes. Science 2005;307:384–387.
[PubMed: 15662004]
Taylor and Turnbull Page 17
Nat Rev Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2007 January 4.
UKPMC Funders Group Author Manuscript
UKPMC Funders Group Author Manuscript
70. Maassen JA, et al. Mitochondrial diabetes: molecular mechanisms and clinical presentation. Diabetes
2004;53(Suppl 1):103–109.
71. Saker PJ, et al. UKPDS 21: low prevalence of the mitochondrial transfer RNA gene (tRNALeu
(UUR)) mutation at position 3243bp in UK Caucasian type 2 diabetic patients. Diabet Med
1997;14:42–45. [PubMed: 9017352]
72. Ohkubo K, et al. Mitochondrial gene mutations in the tRNALeu(UUR) region and diabetes: prevalence
and clinical phenotypes in Japan. Clin Chem 2001;47:1641–1648. [PubMed: 11514398]
73. Kearney PM, et al. Global burden of hypertension: analysis of worldwide data. Lancet 2005;365:217–
223. [PubMed: 15652604]
74. Chinnery PF, et al. The epidemiology of pathogenic mitochondrial DNA mutations. Ann Neurol
2000;48:188–193. [PubMed: 10939569]
75. Choo-Kang AT, et al. Defining the importance of mitochondrial gene defects in maternally inherited
diabetes by sequencing the entire mitochondrial genome. Diabetes 2002;51:2317–2320. [PubMed:
12086967]
76. Wallace D. C. Mitochondrial genetics: a paradigm for aging and degenerative diseases? Science
1992;256:628–632. [PubMed: 1533953]
77. Herrnstadt C, et al. Reduced-median-network analysis of complete mitochondrial DNA coding-region
sequences for the major African, Asian, and European haplogroups. Am J Hum Genet 2002;70:1152–
1171. [PubMed: 11938495]
78. Khogali SS, et al. A common mitochondrial DNA variant associated with susceptibility to dilated
cardiomyopathy in two different populations. Lancet 2001;357:1265–1267. [PubMed: 11418155]
79. Poulton J, et al. Type 2 diabetes is associated with a common mitochondrial variant: evidence from
a population-based case-control study. Hum Mol Genet 2002;11:1581–1583. [PubMed: 12045211]
80. Torroni A, et al. Classification of European mtDNAs from an analysis of three European populations.
Genetics 1996;144:1835–1850. [PubMed: 8978068]
81. Chagnon P, et al. Phylogenetic analysis of the mitochondrial genome indicates significant differences
between patients with Alzheimer disease and controls in a French-Canadian founder population. Am
J Med Genet 1999;85:20–30. [PubMed: 10377009]
82. van der Walt JM, et al. Analysis of European mitochondrial haplogroups with Alzheimer disease risk.
Neurosci Lett 2004;365:28–32. [PubMed: 15234467]
83. Ross OA, et al. mt4216C variant in linkage with the mtDNA TJ cluster may confer a susceptibility
to mitochondrial dysfunction resulting in an increased risk of Parkinson’s disease in the Irish. Exp
Gerontol 2003;38:397–405. [PubMed: 12670626]
84. van der Walt JM, et al. Mitochondrial polymorphisms significantly reduce the risk of Parkinson
disease. Am J Hum Genet 2003;72:804–811. [PubMed: 12618962]
85. Helgason A, Yngvadóttir B, Hrafnkelsson B, Gulcher J, Stefánsson K. An Icelandic example of the
impact of population structure on association studies. Nature Genet 2005;37:90–95. [PubMed:
15608637]
86. King MP, Attardi G. Human cells lacking mtDNA: repopulation with exogenous mitochondria by
complementation. Science 1989;246:500–503. [PubMed: 2814477]This paper highlights the
technology that has made transmitochondrial cybrids — which are generated by fusing human cell
lines that lack mtDNA to enucleated cytoplasts from patients’ cells that harbour mtDNA mutations
and then growing them under selection — such an elegant cell culture system to study the bioenergetic
and cellular consequences of pathogenic mtDNA mutations.
87. Chomyn A, et al. MELAS mutation in mtDNA binding site for transcription termination factor causes
defects in protein synthesis and in respiration but no change in levels of upstream and downstream
mature transcripts. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1992;89:4221–4225. [PubMed: 1584755]
88. Hayashi J, et al. Introduction of disease-related mitochondrial DNA deletions into HeLa cells lacking
mitochondrial DNA results in mitochondrial dysfunction. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1991;88:10614–
10618. [PubMed: 1720544]
89. Tiranti V, et al. Maternally inherited hearing loss, ataxia and myoclonus associated with a novel point
mutation in mitochondrial tRNASer(UCN) gene. Hum Mol Genet 1995;4:1421–1427. [PubMed:
7581383]
Taylor and Turnbull Page 18
Nat Rev Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2007 January 4.
UKPMC Funders Group Author Manuscript
UKPMC Funders Group Author Manuscript
90. Taanman JW, et al. Molecular mechanisms in mitochondrial DNA depletion syndrome. Hum Mol
Genet 1997;6:935–942. [PubMed: 9175742]
91. Dunbar DR, Moonie PA, Jacobs HT, Holt IJ. Different cellular backgrounds confer a marked
advantage to either mutant or wild-type mitochondrial genomes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
1995;92:6562–6566. [PubMed: 7604033]
92. El Meziane A, et al. A tRNA supressor mutation in human mitochondria. Nature Genet 1998;18:350–
353. [PubMed: 9537417]
93. Jenuth J, Peterson AC, Fu K, Shoubridge EA. Random genetic drift in the female germ line explains
the rapid segregation of mammalian mitochondrial DNA. Nature Genet 1996;14:146–151. [PubMed:
8841183]By generating heteroplasmic mice for two (neutral) mtDNA genotypes, the authors
demonstrated that random genetic drift in early oogenesis was the reason for the observed rapid
segregation of mtDNA sequence variants that occurs between generations.
94. Jenuth JP, Peterson AC, Shoubridge EA. Tissue-specific selection for different mtDNA genotypes
in heteroplasmic mice. Nature Genet 1997;16:93–95. [PubMed: 9140402]
95. Marchington DR, Barlow D, Poulton J. Transmitochondrial mice carrying resistance to
chloramphenicol on mitochondrial DNA: developing the first mouse model of mitochondrial DNA
disease. Nature Med 1999;5:957–960. [PubMed: 10426324]
96. Sligh JE, et al. Maternal germ-line transmission of mutant mtDNAs from embryonic stem cell-derived
chimeric mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2000;97:14461–14466. [PubMed: 11106380]
97. Inoue K, et al. Generation of mice with mitochondrial dysfunction by introducing mouse mtDNA
carrying a deletion into zygotes. Nature Genet 2000;26:176–181. [PubMed: 11017072]By isolating
mouse cybrid clones with high levels of a somatic mtDNA rearrangement and fusing these with
fertilized mouse eggs, these authors generated the first mouse model of a pathogenic mtDNA
mutation (mtDNA deletion or duplication), which was transmitted from mother to offspring.
98. Nakada K, et al. Inter-mitochondrial complementation: mitochondria-specific system preventing mice
from expression of disease phenotypes by mutant mtDNA. Nature Med 2001;7:934–940. [PubMed:
11479626]
99. Larsson NG, et al. Mitochondrial transcription factor A is necessary for mtDNA maintenance and
embryogenesis in mice. Nature Genet 1998;18:231–236. [PubMed: 9500544]The first Tfam
knockout mouse model that demonstrates a role for the TFAM nuclear protein in maintaining mtDNA
copy number.
100. Silva JP, et al. Impaired insulin secretion and β-cell loss in tissue-specific knockout mice with
mitochondrial diabetes. Nature Genet 2000;26:336–340. [PubMed: 11062475]
101. Sorensen L, et al. Late-onset corticohippocampal neurodepletion attributable to catastrophic failure
of oxidative phosphorylation in MILON mice. J Neurosci 2001;21:8082–8090. [PubMed:
11588181]
102. Wredenberg A, et al. Increased mitochondrial mass in mitochondrial myopathy mice. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 2002;99:15066–15071. [PubMed: 12417746]
103. Wang J, et al. Dilated cardiomyopathy and atrioventricular conduction blocks induced by heart-
specific inactivation of mitochondrial DNA gene expression. Nature Genet 1999;21:133–137.
[PubMed: 9916807]
104. Chinnery PF, Bindoff LA. 116th ENMC international workshop: the treatment of mitochondrial
disorders, 14th–16th March 2003, Naarden, The Netherlands. Neuromuscul Disord 2003;13:757–
764. [PubMed: 14561500]
105. Taivassalo T, et al. Gene shifting: a novel therapy for mitochondrial myopathy. Hum Mol Genet
1999;8:1047–1052. [PubMed: 10332036]
106. Clark KM, et al. Reversal of a mitochondrial DNA defect in human skeletal muscle. Nature Genet
1997;16:222–224. [PubMed: 9207784]
107. Fu K, et al. A novel heteroplasmic tRNAleu(CUN) mtDNA point mutation in a sporadic patient with
mitochondrial encephalomyopathy segregates rapidly in skeletal muscle and suggests an approach
to therapy. Hum Mol Genet 1996;5:1835–1840. [PubMed: 8923013]
108. Taivassalo T, et al. Aerobic conditioning in patients with mitochondrial myopathies: physiological,
biochemical, and genetic effects. Ann Neurol 2001;50:133–141. [PubMed: 11506394]
Taylor and Turnbull Page 19
Nat Rev Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2007 January 4.
UKPMC Funders Group Author Manuscript
UKPMC Funders Group Author Manuscript
109. Manfredi G, et al. Rescue of a deficiency in ATP synthesis by transfer of MTATP6, a mitochondrial
DNA-encoded gene, to the nucleus. Nature Genet 2002;30:394–399. [PubMed: 11925565]
110. Guy J, et al. Rescue of a mitochondrial deficiency causing Leber Hereditary Optic Neuropathy. Ann
Neurol 2002;52:534–542. [PubMed: 12402249]
111. Kolesnikova OA, et al. Suppression of mutations in mitochondrial DNA by tRNAs imported from
the cytoplasm. Science 2000;289:1931–1933. [PubMed: 10988073]
112. Kolesnikova OA, et al. Nuclear DNA-encoded tRNAs targeted into mitochondria can rescue a
mitochondrial DNA mutation associated with the MERRF syndrome in cultured human cells. Hum
Mol Genet 2004;13:2519–2534. [PubMed: 15317755]
113. Taylor RW, Chinnery PF, Turnbull DM, Lightowlers RN. Selective inhibition of mutant human
mitochondrial DNA replication in vitro by peptide nucleic acids. Nature Genet 1997;15:212–215.
[PubMed: 9020853]
114. Tanaka M, et al. Gene therapy for mitochondrial disease by delivering restriction endonuclease
SmaI into mitochondria. J Biomed Sci 2002;9:534–541. [PubMed: 12372991]
115. Srivastava S, Moraes CT. Manipulating mitochondrial DNA heteroplasmy by a mitochondrially
targeted restriction endonuclease. Hum Mol Genet 2001;10:3093–3099. [PubMed: 11751691]
116. Manfredi G, et al. Oligomycin induces a decrease in the cellular content of a pathogenic mutation
in the human mitochondrial ATPase 6 gene. J Biol Chem 1999;274:9386–9381. [PubMed:
10092618]
117. Santra S, Gilkerson RW, Davidson M, Schon EA. Ketogenic treatment reduces deleted
mitochondrial DNAs in cultured human cells. Ann Neurol 2004;56:662–669. [PubMed: 15389892]
118. Feuermann M, et al. The yeast counterparts of human ‘MELAS’ mutations cause mitochondrial
dysfunction that can be rescued by overexpression of the mitochondrial translation factor EF-Tu.
EMBO Rep 2003;4:53–58. [PubMed: 12524521]
119. Harding AE, Holt IJ, Sweeney MG, Brockington M, Davis MB. Prenatal diagnosis of mitochondrial
DNA 8993T>G disease. Am J Hum Genet 1992;50:629–633. [PubMed: 1539598]
120. Leshinsky-Silver E, et al. Prenatal exclusion of Leigh syndrome due to T8993C mutation in the
mitochondrial DNA. Prenat Diagn 2003;23:31–33. [PubMed: 12533809]
121. Jacobs LJ, et al. Transmission and prenatal diagnosis of the T9176C mitochondrial DNA mutation.
Mol Hum Reprod 2005;11:223–228. [PubMed: 15709156]
122. Weber K, et al. A new mtDNA mutation showing accumulation with time and restriction to skeletal
muscle. Am J Hum Genet 1997;60:373–380. [PubMed: 9012410]
123. White SL, et al. Two cases of prenatal analysis for the pathogenic T to G substitution at nucleotide
8993 in mitochondrial DNA. Prenat Diagn 1999;19:1165–1168. [PubMed: 10590437]
124. Lin DP, et al. Comparison of mitochondrial DNA contents in human embryos with good or poor
morphology at the 8-cell stage. Fertil Steril 2004;81:73–79. [PubMed: 14711547]
125. Dean NL, et al. Prospect of preimplantation genetic diagnosis for heritable mitochondrial DNA
diseases. Mol Hum Reprod 2003;9:631–638. [PubMed: 12970401]
126. Kagawa Y, Hayashi JI. Gene therapy of mitochondrial diseases using human cytoplasts. Gene Ther
1997;4:6–10. [PubMed: 9068789]
127. Cohen J, Scott R, Schimmel T, Levron J, Willadsen S. Birth of infant after transfer of anucleate
donor oocyte cytoplasm into recipient eggs. Lancet 1997;350:186–187. [PubMed: 9250192]
128. Hawes SM, Sapienza C, Latham KE. Ooplasmic donation in humans: the potential for epigenic
modifications. Hum Reprod 2002;17:850–852. [PubMed: 11925371]
129. Brenner CA, Barritt JA, Willadsen S, Cohen J. Mitochondrial DNA heteroplasmy after human
ooplasmic transplantation. Fertil Steril 2000;74:573–578. [PubMed: 10973657]
130. Thorburn DR, Dahl HHM. Mitochondrial disorders: genetics, counseling, prenatal diagnosis and
reproductive options. Am J Med Genet 2001;106:102–114. [PubMed: 11579429]
131. Roberts RM. Prevention of human mitochondrial (mtDNA) disease by nucleus transplantation into
an enucleated donor oocyte. Am J Med Genet 1999;87:265–266. [PubMed: 10564883]This paper
describes the possibility of preventing transmission of mitochondrial DNA disease.
Taylor and Turnbull Page 20
Nat Rev Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2007 January 4.
UKPMC Funders Group Author Manuscript
UKPMC Funders Group Author Manuscript
132. Liu H, Wang CW, Grifo JA, Krey LC, Zhang J. Reconstruction of mouse oocytes by germinal vesicle
transfer: maturity of host oocyte cytoplasm determines meiosis. Hum Reprod 1999;14:2357–2361.
[PubMed: 10469710]
133. Liu H, Zhang J, Krey LC, Grifo JA. In-vitro development of mouse zygotes following reconstruction
by sequential transfer of germinal vesicles and haploid pronuclei. Hum Reprod 2000;15:1997–2002.
[PubMed: 10967003]
134. Takeuchi T, Ergun B, Huang TH, Rosenwaks Z, Palermo GD. A reliable technique of nuclear
transplantation for immature mammalian oocytes. Hum Reprod 1999;14:1312–1317. [PubMed:
10325284]
135. Barnes FL, et al. Blastocyst development and birth after in-vitro maturation of human primary
oocytes, intracytoplasmic sperm injection and assisted hatching. Hum Reprod 1995;10:3243–3247.
[PubMed: 8822452]
136. Goud PT, et al. In-vitro maturation of human germinal vesicle stage oocytes: role of cumulus cells
and epidermal growth factor in the culture medium. Hum Reprod 1998;13:1638–1644. [PubMed:
9688405]
137. Kattera S, Chen C. Normal birth after microsurgical enucleation of tripronuclear human zygotes:
case report. Hum Reprod 2003;18:1319–1322. [PubMed: 12773466]
138. Meirelles F, Smith LC. Mitochondrial genotype segregation in a mouse heteroplasmic lineage
produced by embyonic karyoplast transplantation. Genetics 1997;145:445–451. [PubMed:
9071597]
139. Meirelles F, Smith LC. Mitochondrial genotype segregation during preimplantation development
in mouse heteroplasmic embryos. Genetics 1998;148:877–883. [PubMed: 9504933]
140. Harman D. Free radical theory of aging. Mutat Res 1992;275:257–266. [PubMed: 1383768]This is
a description of the theory of ageing in which mitochondria have a key role.
141. Geromel V, et al. Superoxide-induced massive apoptosis in cultured skin fibroblasts harboring the
neurogenic ataxia retinitis pigmentosa (NARP) mutation in the ATPase-6 gene of the mitochondrial
DNA. Hum Mol Genet 2001;10:1221–1228. [PubMed: 11371515]
142. Mattiazzi M, et al. The mtDNA T8993G (NARP) mutation results in an impairment of oxidative
phosphorylation that can be improved by antioxidants. Hum Mol Genet 2004;13:869–879.
[PubMed: 14998933]
143. Muller-Hocker J. Cytochrome-c-oxidase deficient cardiomyocytes in the human heart —an age-
related phenomenon. A histochemical ultracytochemical study. Am J Pathol 1989;134:1167–1173.
[PubMed: 2541614]
144. Muller-Hocker J, Seibel P, Schneiderbanger K, Kadenbach B. Different in situ hybridization patterns
of mitochondrial DNA in cytochrome c oxidase-deficient extraocular muscle fibres in the elderly.
Virchows Arch A Pathol Anat Histopathol 1993;422:7–15. [PubMed: 7679851]
145. Brierley EJ, Johnson MA, Lightowlers RN, James OF, Turnbull DM. Role of mitochondrial DNA
mutations in human aging: implications for the central nervous system and muscle. Ann Neurol
1998;43:217–223. [PubMed: 9485063]
146. Nekhaeva E, et al. Clonally expanded mtDNA point mutations are abundant in individual cells of
human tissues. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2002;99:5521–5526. [PubMed: 11943860]
147. Wallace DC. Diseases of the mitochondrial DNA. Annu Rev Biochem 1992;61:1175–1212.
[PubMed: 1497308]
148. de Grey AD. A proposed refinement of the mitochondrial free radical theory of aging. Bioessays
1997;19:161–166. [PubMed: 9046246]
149. Yoneda M, Chomyn A, Martinuzzi A, Hurko O, Attardi G. Marked replicative advantage of human
mtDNA carrying a point mutation that causes the MELAS encephalomyopathy. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 1992;89:11164–11168. [PubMed: 1454794]
150. Elson JL, Samuels DC, Turnbull DM, Chinnery PF. Random intracellular drift explains the clonal
expansion of mitochondrial DNA mutations with age. Am J Hum Genet 2001;68:802–806.
[PubMed: 11179029]
151. Polyak K, et al. Somatic mutations of the mitochondrial genome in human colorectal tumours. Nature
Genet 1998;20:291–293. [PubMed: 9806551]The first paper to describe the presence of somatic
mtDNA mutations in solid human tumours, in this case colon cancer. In many cases, the mtDNA
Taylor and Turnbull Page 21
Nat Rev Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2007 January 4.
UKPMC Funders Group Author Manuscript
UKPMC Funders Group Author Manuscript
mutations had accumulated to homoplasmic levels and were not evident in the matched normal
tissue from the same patient. A causal relationship between mtDNA mutations and tumorigenesis
is yet to be established
152. Fliss MS, et al. Facile detection of mitochondrial DNA mutations in tumors and bodily fluids. Science
2000;287:2017–2019. [PubMed: 10720328]
153. Jeronimo C, et al. Mitochondrial mutations in early stage prostate cancer and bodily fluids. Oncogene
2001;20:5195–5198. [PubMed: 11526508]
154. Jones JB, et al. Detection of mitochondrial DNA mutations in pancreatic cancer offers a ‘mass’-ive
advantage over detection of nuclear DNA mutations. Cancer Res 2001;61:1299–1304. [PubMed:
11245424]
155. Kirches E, et al. High frequency of mitochondrial DNA mutations in glioblastoma multiforme
identified by direct sequence comparison to blood samples. Int J Cancer 2001;93:534–538.
[PubMed: 11477557]
156. He L, et al. Somatic mitochondrial DNA mutations in adult-onset leukaemia. Leukemia
2003;17:2487–2491. [PubMed: 14523470]
157. Wardell TM, et al. Changes in the human mitochondrial genome after treatment of malignant disease.
Mutat Res 2003;525:19–27. [PubMed: 12650902]
158. Zeviani M, et al. Deletions of mitochondrial DNA in Kearns–Sayre syndrome. Neurology
1988;38:1339–1346. [PubMed: 3412580]
159. Goto Y, Nonaka I, Horai S. A mutation in the tRNALeu(UUR) gene associated with the MELAS
subgroup of mitochondrial encephalomyopathies. Nature 1990;348:651–653. [PubMed: 2102678]
160. Santorelli FM, et al. Identification of a novel mutation in the mtDNA ND5 gene associated with
MELAS. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1997;238:326–328. [PubMed: 9299505]
161. Kirby DM, et al. Mutations of the mitochondrial ND1 gene as a cause of MELAS. J Med Genet
2004;41:784–789. [PubMed: 15466014]
162. Shoffner JM, et al. Myoclonic epilepsy and ragged-red fiber disease (MERRF) is associated with a
mitochondrial DNA tRNALys mutation. Cell 1990;61:931–937. [PubMed: 2112427]
163. Holt IJ, Harding AE, Petty RK, Morgan-Hughes JA. A new mitochondrial disease associated with
mitochondrial DNA heteroplasmy. Am J Hum Genet 1990;46:428–433. [PubMed: 2137962]
164. van den Ouweland JWM, Lemkes HHPJ, Ruitenbeek K. Mutation in mitochondrial tRNALeu
(UUR) gene in a large pedigree with maternally transmitted type II diabetes mellitus and deafness.
Nature Genet 1992;1:368–371. [PubMed: 1284550]
165. Howell N, et al. Leber hereditary optic neuropathy: identification of the same mitochondrial ND1
mutation in six pedigrees. Am J Hum Genet 1991;49:939–950. [PubMed: 1928099]
166. Johns DR, Neufeld MJ, Park RD. An ND-6 mitochondrial DNA mutation associated with Leber
hereditary optic neuropathy. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1992;187:1551–1557. [PubMed:
1417830]
167. Hao H, Bonilla E, Manfredi G, DiMauro S, Moraes CT. Segregation patterns of a novel mutation
in the mitochondrial tRNA glutamic acid gene associated with myopathy and diabetes mellitus. Am
J Hum Genet 1995;56:1017–1025. [PubMed: 7726154]
168. McFarland R, et al. Familial myopathy: New insights into the T14709C mitochondrial tRNA
mutation. Ann Neurol 2004;55:478–484. [PubMed: 15048886]
169. Reid FM, Vernham GA, Jacobs HT. A novel mitochondrial point mutation in a maternal pedigree
with sensorineural deafness. Hum Mutat 1994;3:243–247. [PubMed: 8019558]
170. Sue CM, et al. Maternally inherited hearing loss in a large kindred with a novel T7511C mutation
in the mitochondrial DNA tRNASer(UCN) gene. Neurology 1999;52:1905–1908. [PubMed:
10371545]
171. Strachan, T.; Read, AP. Human Molecular Genetics. 2nd edn. John Wiley and Sons; New York:
1999.
Taylor and Turnbull Page 22
Nat Rev Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2007 January 4.
UKPMC Funders Group Author Manuscript
UKPMC Funders Group Author Manuscript
Figure 1. The role of the mitochondrial genome in energy generation
a This highlights the importance of the mitochondrial genome in contributing polypeptide
subunits to the five enzyme complexes that comprise the oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS)
system within the inner mitochondrial membrane — the site of ATP synthesis. The reoxidation
of reducing equivalents (NADH (reduced flavin adenine dinucleotide)) that are produced by
the oxidation (reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide) and FADH2 of carbohydrates (the
tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle) and fatty acids (β-oxidation) is coupled to the generation of
an electrochemical gradient across the inner mitochondrial membrane, which is harnessed by
the ATP synthase to drive the formation of ATP. b A map of the human mitochondrial genome.
The genes that encode the subunits of complex I (ND1–ND6 and ND4L) are shown in blue;
cytochrome c oxidase (COI–COIII) is shown in red; cytochrome b of complex III is shown in
green; and the subunits of the ATP synthase (ATPase 6 and 8) are shown in yellow. The two
ribosomal RNAs (rRNAs; 12S and 16S, shown in purple) and 22 tRNAs, indicated by black
lines and denoted by their single letter code, which are required for mitochondrial protein
synthesis are also shown. The displacement loop (D-loop), or non-coding control region,
contains sequences that are vital for the initiation of both mtDNA replication and transcription,
including the proposed origin of heavy-strand replication (shown as OH). The origin of light-
strand replication is shown as OL.
Taylor and Turnbull Page 23
Nat Rev Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2007 January 4.
UKPMC Funders Group Author Manuscript
UKPMC Funders Group Author Manuscript
Figure 2. Cytochrome c oxidase deficiency in mitochondrial DNA-associated disease and ageing
Transverse tissue sections that are reacted for both cytochrome c oxidase (COX) and succinate
dehydrogenase (SDH) activities sequentially, with COX-positive cells shown in brown and
COX-deficient cells shown in blue. a Skeletal muscle from a patient with a heteroplasmic
mitochondrial tRNA point mutation. The section shows a typical ‘mosaic’ pattern of COX
activity, with many muscle fibres harbouring levels of mutated mtDNA that are above the
crucial threshold to produce a functional enzyme complex. b Cardiac tissue (left ventricle)
from a patient with a homoplasmic tRNA mutation that causes hypertrophic cardiomyopathy,
which demonstrates an absence of COX in most cells. c A section of cerebellum from a patient
with an mtDNA rearrangement that highlights the presence of COX-deficient neurons. d,e
Tissues that show COX deficiency that is due to clonal expansion of somatic mtDNA mutations
within single cells — a phenomenon that is seen in both post-mitotic cells (d; extraocular
muscles) and rapidly dividing cells (e; colonic crypt) in ageing humans.
Taylor and Turnbull Page 24
Nat Rev Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2007 January 4.
UKPMC Funders Group Author Manuscript
UKPMC Funders Group Author Manuscript
Figure 3. The mitochondrial genetic bottleneck
During the production of primary oocytes, a selected number of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA)
molecules are transferred into each oocyte. Oocyte maturation is associated with the rapid
replication of this mtDNA population. This restriction-amplification event can lead to a random
shift of mtDNA mutational load between generations and is responsible for the variable levels
of mutated mtDNA observed in affected offspring from mothers with pathogenic mtDNA
mutations. Mitochondria that contain mutated mtDNA are shown in red, those with normal
mtDNA are shown in green.
Taylor and Turnbull Page 25
Nat Rev Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2007 January 4.
UKPMC Funders Group Author Manuscript
UKPMC Funders Group Author Manuscript
Figure 4. Nuclear transfer techniques
The prevention of mutated maternal mtDNA transmission could be achieved by nuclear transfer
techniques. In theory, this could be carried out at the germinal vesicle stage (a), when clearly
identifiable structures are visible. The germinal vesicle contains nuclear chromosomes and
could be transferred to an oocyte that contains normal mtDNA (green). Alternatively,
pronuclear transfer can be carried out at the fertilized oocyte stage (b); this involves removal
of the male and female pronuclei from the oocyte that contains mutated mtDNA (red) and their
subsequent transfer to an oocyte that has normal mtDNA (green).
Taylor and Turnbull Page 26
Nat Rev Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2007 January 4.
UKPMC Funders Group Author Manuscript
UKPMC Funders Group Author Manuscript
UKPMC Funders Group Author Manuscript
UKPMC Funders Group Author Manuscript
Taylor and Turnbull Page 27
Table 1
Comparison between the human nuclear and mitochondrial genomes*
Characteristic Nuclear genome Mitochondrial genome
Size ~3.3 x 109 bp 16,569 bp
Number of DNA molecules per
cell
23 in haploid cells; 46 in diploid cells Several thousand copies per cell (polyploidy)
Number of genes encoded ~20,000–30,000 37 (13 polypeptides, 22 tRNAs and 2 rRNAs)
Gene density ~1 per 40,000 bp 1 per 450 bp
Introns Frequently found in most genes Absent
Percentage of coding DNA ~3% ~93%
Codon usage The universal genetic code AUA codes for methionine; TGA codes for tryptophan;
AGA and AGG specify stop codons
Associated proteins Nucleosome-associated histone proteins and
non-histone proteins
No histones; but associated with several proteins(for
example, TFAM) that form nucleoids
Mode of inheritance Mendelian inheritance for autosomes and the
X chromosome; paternal inheritance for the Y
chromosome
Exclusively maternal
Replication Strand-coupled mechanism that uses DNA
polymerases α and δ
Strand-coupled and strand-displacement models; only uses
DNA polymerase γ
Transcription Most genes are transcribed individually All genes on both strands are transcribed as large
polycistrons
Recombination Each pair of homologues recombines during
the prophase of meiosis
There is evidence that recombination occurs at a cellular
level but little evidence that it occurs at a population level
*Table modified from REF. 171 © (1999) John Wiley and Sons. TFAM, mitochondrial transcription factor A; rRNA, ribosomal RNA.
Nat Rev Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2007 January 4.
UKPMC Funders Group Author Manuscript
UKPMC Funders Group Author Manuscript
Taylor and Turnbull Page 28
Table 2
Clinical disorders that are caused by mutations in mitochondrial DNA
Mitochondrial DNADisorder
Clinical phenotype
mtDNA genotype
Gene
Status
Inheritance
Reference
Kearns–Sayre syndrome
Progressive myopathy,ophthalmoplegia,cardiomyopathy
A single, large-scaledeletion
Several deleted genes
Heteroplasmic
Usually sporadic
61,158
CPEO
Ophthalmoplegia
A single, large-scaledeletion
Several deleted genes
Heteroplasmic
Usually sporadic
61, 64
Pearson syndrome
Pancytopoenia, lactic acidosis
A single, large-scaledeletion
Several deleted genes
Heteroplasmic
Usually sporadic
65
MELAS
Myopathy, encephalopathy lacticacidosis, stroke-like episodes
3243A>G; 3271T>C
TRNL1
Heteroplasmic
Maternal
159
Individual mutations
ND1 and ND5
Heteroplasmic
Maternal
160, 161
MERRF
Myoclonic epilepsy, myopathy
8344A>G; 8356T>C
TRNK
Heteroplasmic
Maternal
162
NARP
Neuropathy, ataxia, retinitispigmentosa
8993T>G
ATP6
Heteroplasmic
Maternal
163
MILS
Progressive brain-stem disorder
8993T>C
ATP6
Heteroplasmic
Maternal
67
MIDD
Diabetes, deafness
3243A>G
TRNL1
Heteroplasmic
Maternal
164
LHON
Optic neuropathy
3460G>A
ND1
Hetero- or homoplasmic
Maternal
165
11778G>A
ND4
Hetero- or homoplasmic
Maternal
62
14484T>C
ND6
Hetero- or homoplasmic
Maternal
166
Myopathy and diabetes
Myopathy, weakness, diabetes
14709T>C
TRNE
Hetero- or homoplasmic
Maternal
167,168
Sensorineural hearing loss
Deafness
1555A>G
RNR1
Homoplasmic
Maternal
55
Individual mutations
TRNS1
Hetero- or homoplasmic
Maternal
169,170
Exercise intolerance
Fatigue, muscle weakness
Individual mutations
CYB
Heteroplasmic
Sporadic
68
Fatal, infantileencephalopathy; Leigh/Leigh-like syndrome
Encephalopathy, lactic acidosis
10158T>C; 10191T>C
ND3
Heteroplasmic
Sporadic
66
ATP6
, ATPase 6; CPEO, chronic progressive external ophthalmoplegia; 
CYB
, cytochrome 
b; LHON, Leber hereditary optic neuropathy; MELAS, mitochondrial myopathy, encephalopathy, lactic
acidosis and stroke-like episodes; MERRF, myoclonic epilepsy and ragged-red fibres; MIDD, maternally-inherited diabetes and deafness; MILS, maternally-inherited Leigh syndrome; 
ND1,3–6
,
NADH dehydrogenase subunits 1,3–6; NARP, neurogenic weakness, ataxia and retinitis pigmentosa; 
RNR1
, 12
S ribosomal RNA; 
TRNE,TRNK,TRNL1,TRNS1
, mitochondrial tRNAs.
Nat Rev Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2007 January 4.
