© 2008 Crimi and Rigolio, publisher and licensee Dove Medical Press Ltd. This is an Open Access 
article which permits unrestricted noncommercial use, provided the original work is properly cited.
International Journal of Nanomedicine 2008:3(1) 51–57 51
REVIEW
The mitochondrial genome, a growing interest 
inside an organelle
Marco Crimi
1
Roberta Rigolio
2
1
National Institute of Molecular 
Genetics (INGM), Functional 
Genomics Unit, Milan, Italy; 
2
Department of Neurosciences and 
Biomedical Technologies, University 
of Milan Bicocca, Monza, Italy
Correspondence: Crimi Marco
Istituto Nazionale di Genetica Molecolare 
(INGM), Via F. Sforza, 28, 20122, Milan, 
Italy
Tel +39 02/5843.8616
Fax +39 02/5843.9349
Email crimi@ingm.it
Abstract: Mitochondria are semi-autonomously reproductive organelles within eukaryotic 
cells carrying their own genetic material, called the mitochondrial genome (mtDNA). Until 
some years ago, mtDNA had primarily been used as a tool in population genetics. As scientists 
began associating mtDNA mutations with dozens of mysterious disorders, as well as the aging 
process and a variety of chronic degenerative diseases, it became increasingly evident that the 
information contained in this genome had substantial potential applications to improve human 
health. Today, mitochondria research covers a wide range of disciplines, including clinical 
medicine, biochemistry, genetics, molecular cell biology, bioinformatics, plant sciences and 
physiology. The present review intends to present a summary of the most exiting fi elds of the 
mitochondrial research bringing together several contributes in terms of original prospective 
and future applications.
Keywords: mtDNA, heteroplasmy, molecular diagnostics, mitochondriopathies, nano-
genomics
Mitochondrial biology and energy
The mitochondrial DNA, an extremely peculiar genome
About three billion years ago, bacteria with unique energy-producing capabilities 
took residence in a proto-eukaryotic cell, developing a symbiotic relationship: the 
host cell provided physical space and materials to the bacterium, which supplied 
energy to the host. During the evolution of this symbiotic relationship, the bacterium 
transferred many of its genes (about 1500) to the host nucleus, creating the modern 
nuclear DNA (nDNA) genome (Wallace 2005a). Thus, the modern mitochondrial 
chromosome is a circular DNA (mtDNA) molecule, which consists of 16,569 base 
pairs that retain 37 genes critical for producing energy. The entire mtDNA is almost 
exclusively transcribed (it contains very small noncoding areas) and is arranged in 
nucleoids (Holt et al 2007).
Because the mitochondria produce most of the cell’s reactive oxygen species 
(ROS), mtDNA is constantly under mutagenic stress (about 100 times more than the 
stress experienced by nDNA). Moreover, being maternally inherited and outside the 
nucleus, mtDNA can change through the sequential accumulation of mutations along 
radiating maternal lineages (Schapira 2006).
Mitochondrial energy, “beyond the ATP”
The mitochondrial genome controls many cell functions, critical for producing the cell’s 
energy. The most important of these functions are: 1) OXPHOS (oxidative phosphoryla-
tion), the complex mechanism by which the mitochondria’s respiratory machinery strips 
electron energy from carbohydrates and fats and harnesses it to phosphorylate ADP to 
make ATP; 2) the production of most of the cell’s ROS; and 3) regulation of apoptosis 
by activating the mitochondrial permeability transmission pore (Wallace 2005b).
International Journal of Nanomedicine 2008:3(1)
52
Crimi and Rigolio
Mitochondrial genetics 
and medicine
Mitochondrial disease 
and “Heteroplasmy”
Mitochondrial diseases range in severity from almost non-
diagnosable to fatal. They also are a function of two types 
of mtDNA mutations: those inherited through the female 
germ-line and those that accumulate with age in somatic cells. 
Because mitochondria of a sexually-reproducing species are 
inherited maternally, germ-line mtDNA genetic defects can 
affect both males and females, but can only be transmitted to 
offspring by females. Somatic mutations accumulate when 
food calories exceed a cell’s respiratory capacity, resulting in 
excessive production of ROS, which damages mitochondrial 
membranes, proteins and DNA (Schapira 2006).
Since there are hundreds or even thousands of mtDNA cop-
ies in every eukaryotic cell, mutations may either be present in 
all copies (homoplasmy) or affect only a fraction of them (het-
eroplasmy). As they replicate, the populations of their normal 
and mutant mtDNAs randomly segregate among the daughter 
cells, the percentages of each changing with each replication. 
When tissues accumulate a certain ratio of mutant versus wild-
type mtDNA (threshold effect), cells produce less energy, more 
ROS, have an increased apoptosis rate and disease presents 
itself. Mutations can cause several different diseases depend-
ing upon the severity of the problem in the mitochondria and 
the tissue affected. The most susceptible tissues include those 
with a high energetic demand, such as brain, heart, skeletal 
muscle, endocrine, blood, and kidney tissues.
Some diseases are observable at birth while others do not 
show themselves until late adulthood. The clinical variability 
of these disorders varies from person to person (depending 
upon metabolism requirements and the effects of the spe-
cifi c mutation) and makes the diagnosis very challenging. 
Mitochondrial diseases caused by mtDNA abnormalities 
are very numerous and diverse, and because they are due 
to age-related decline in OXPHOS, many of these diseases 
are late-onset and progressive. In addition, it is suspected 
that many other diseases are caused in part by dysfunction 
of mitochondria, including diabetes mellitus, some forms 
of cardiovascular disease, Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s 
diseases, and many more (DiMauro et al 2006a).
Human mtDNA haplogroups
As humans migrated out of Africa, a dozen mtDNA lineages 
(haplogroups) evolved. The conventional wisdom is that 
the expression of pathogenic mtDNA mutations can be 
modulated by haplogroups (Crimi et al 2005) or, more gener-
ally, certain mtDNA haplogroups may affect OXPHOS, thus 
predisposing to, or protecting from, disease.
In recent studies, some ancient European mtDNA 
haplogroups were found to be associated with increased 
longevity and, moreover, to produce more heat relative to 
other variants, an advantage in colder northern latitudes 
(Capri et al 2006). Because these variants maintain their 
electron transport chains in a more oxidized state than do 
other variants, they produce less ROS and are less likely to 
accumulate mitochondrial damage from ROS.
Cancer and mtDNA
Since tumor cells actively metabolize glucose and generate 
lactate while still consuming oxygen, OXPHOS defects must 
be important for neoplastic transformation. Recently, certain 
tumors have been shown to result from mutations in nDNA 
encoded mitochondrial proteins, at least some of which are 
likely to result in increased ROS production (Wallace 2005a). 
Since the very fi rst demonstration that the G10398A mtDNA 
polymorphism is associated with increase risk for breast can-
cer in African-American women (Canter et al 2005), mtDNA 
mutations have also been associated with cancer, including 
incidence in renal adenocarcinoma, colon cancer cells, head 
and neck tumors, astrocytic, thyroid, breast, and prostate 
tumors. Meta-analysis of “tumor-specifi c somatic mtDNA 
mutations” has revealed that cancer mtDNA mutations fall 
into two major classes: those that partially inhibit OXPHOS 
thus increasing ROS production and those that alter the mito-
chondrial OXPHOS circuitry to permit the tumor cells to adapt 
to new environmental constraints such as alterations in avail-
able nutrients and oxygen tension (Brandon et al 2006).
Genetic classifi cation of mitochondrial 
diseases
Mutations in mtDNA
Given that the mtDNA genome is very compact, almost any 
mutation could be deleterious; so far, over 170 known muta-
tions of the mtDNA are responsible for a myriad of diseases. 
Mutations in mtDNA are classifi ed into three categories 
(Figure 1): large-scale rearrangements, point mutations in 
RNA genes affecting the mitochondrial protein translation, 
and point mutations in protein coding genes, resulting in 
specifi c OXPHOS defects (DiMauro et al 2006b).
Large-scale mtDNA rearrangements occur as multiple 
short deletions or a single macro-deletion with unknown 
mechanisms. They have been commonly associated with 
progressive external ophthalmoplegia (PEO), a paralysis 
International Journal of Nanomedicine 2008:3(1)
53
Updating mtDNA research
of the extra-ocular muscles. PEO may manifest as part 
of a more severe and fatal multi-system disorder termed 
Kearns-Sayre syndrome (KSS). Rearrangements of mtDNA 
have also been identifi ed in patients with syderoblastic 
anemia, known as Pearson’s syndrome. Recent research 
reveals that sustanatia nigra neurons of the elderly show 
high concentrations of clonally expanded deleted mtDNAs 
that lead to functional impairment of the respiratory chain 
(Kraytsberg 2006). With more than 60 different mutated 
nucleotides already reported, RNAs are the most common 
class of pathogenic mtDNA point mutations that occur 
in mitochondrial tRNA genes. These mutations cause a 
variety of metabolic syndromes, including mitochondrial 
encephalomyopathy, lactic acidosis and stroke-like episodes 
(MELAS), myoclonus epilepsy and ragged-red fibers 
(MERRF), and several other combinations of symptoms 
involving different tissues. The most common mtDNA 
mutation in this group is the A3243G transition in the 
tRNA
Leu(UUR)
 gene, disclosed in the majority of patients with 
the clinical features of MELAS. This same mutation also 
accounts for a large number of PEO patients that do not have 
large-scale deletions. Point mutations in the mitochondrial 
tRNA
Lys
 gene (A8344G and T8356C) have been found in 
most patients with MERRF.
Several point mutations in protein coding genes have 
been described in patients with Leber’s hereditary optic 
neuropathy (LHON), specifi cally the transition G11778A 
accounts for approximately 50% of all cases. Neuropathy, 
Lactic Acidosis?
RRF?
Yes
COX-?
I+III+IV
Deletions
I
MELAS
V
NARP
II
AtRNA
Leu
mutation?
IIIorIV
LHON MMLS AID
mtDNA rearrangements?
Depletion
Yes
Yes No
Yes No
Yes No
Yes No
PEOAS MNGIE MERRFKSS
Genome-wide sequencing
MultipleSingle-macro
LS
G3460A, G11778A, T14484C T10158C, G13513A T8993G A1555G
One of these ‘common’ mutations?
YesNo
Pathogenetic diagnosis
The A8344G mutation?
Yes No
MMC
PolGTP 1TNAroelkniwTKOUGdro2KT
LS
Heteroplasmic mtDNA mutation?
YesNo
Other OXPHOS
genes
Autosomal recessive?
Yes No
MDS SANDO
A3243G
MIDD
No
No
OPA1
Optic atrophy?
OA
Nuclear genes
investigation
OXPHOS deficiency
mtDNA
ANAL
YSIS
CLINICAL
EV
ALUA
TION
Pedigree analysis
Laboratory & Histology testing
Biochemistry
PS
CSF protein >100mg/ml?
Yes No
Yes No
Abnormal MRI?
Figure 1 Mitochondrial disease evaluation fl owchart, from a clinical suspect to the molecular diagnosis. When a mitochondrial illness is suspected, laboratory testing is the 
usual method physicians go about evaluating patients for disorders of energy metabolism. If the suspect a mitochondrial defect is confi rmed, more integrated tests are a must 
and include: the biochemical analysis of the respiratory chain and the screening of the most frequent mtDNA mutations. If necessary, sequencing the so-far-known nuclear 
genes responsible for mitochondrial diseases and the complete sequence analysis of the entire mitochondrial genome are another chances for selected cases. A scattered line 
states when a diagnosis could be done.
Abbreviations: AID, aminoglycoside-induced deafness;  AS,  Alper’s Syndrome; COX, Cytochrome c OXidase; CSF, cerebrospinal fl uid; KSS, Kearns-Sayre syndrome; PS, Pearson’s 
syndrome; LHON, Leber’s hereditary optic neuropathy; LS, Leigh’s syndrome; MDS, MtDNA depletion syndrome; MELAS, mitochondrial myopathy, encephalopathy, lactic acidosis, 
and stroke; MERRF, myoclonus epilepsy with ragged red fi bers; MIDD, maternal inherited diabetes and deafness; MM, mitochondrial myopathy; MMC, maternal myopathy and 
cardiomyopathy; OA, optic atrophy; MNGIE, mitochondrial neurogastrointestinal encephalopathy; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; NARP, neurogenic weakness, ataxia and 
retinitis pigmentosa; PEO, progressive external ophthalmoplegia; RRF, ragged red fi bers; SANDO, sensory ataxic neuropathy, dysarthria, and ophthalmoparesis.
International Journal of Nanomedicine 2008:3(1)
54
Crimi and Rigolio
ataxia, and retinitis pigmentosa (NARP) is associated with a 
missense G8993T mutation in the ATPase 6 gene. The same 
mtDNA mutation can also cause a severe infantile metabolic 
encephalomyopathy known as maternal inherited Leigh’s 
syndrome (MILS).
New mtDNA mutations, especially in protein-coding 
genes, are still being identifi ed in very heterogeneous clinical 
pictures where the heteroplasmic degree usually correlates 
with the phenotypical severity. Thus, heteroplasmy was 
included among the canonical criteria for pathogenicity 
(Schapira 2006). In addition, the ‘candidate’ mutation ought 
to: (i) be absent in normal subjects of the same ethnic back-
ground; (ii) alter a functionally important and evolutionarily 
conserved site; (iii) cause a functional alteration, demon-
strable with a specifi c biochemical defect or as a correlation 
between mutation burden and RRF or COX-negative fi bers 
(single fi ber PCR).
Unlike heteroplasmic mutations that are always patho-
genic, homoplasmic variants could be not-neutral. There 
are several possible factors conditioning the phenotypic 
expression of a homoplasmic mtDNA mutation: environ-
mental factors, mtDNA haplotype, nDNA background, and 
tissue-specifi c expression of interacting genes (Limongelli 
et al 2004).
Mutations in nDNA
Mitochondrial diseases resulting from mutations in nDNA-
encoded mitochondrial genes fall into three other major 
categories: those affecting structural genes, those affecting 
mtDNA maintenance and expression, and those regulating 
mitochondrial antioxidant defenses (DiMauro 2006c).
Identifi cation of the disorders due to defects of inter-
genomic signaling have progressed significantly after 
the discovery of thymidine phosphorylase (TP), the gene 
responsible for the mitochondrial neurogastrointestinal 
encephalomyopathy (MNGIE). Mutations in TP attracted 
attention to the nucleotide pool in the pathogenesis of 
multiple deletions and depletion of mtDNA (with the 
mtDNA copy number per mitochondrion reduced as much 
as to less than 5% of normal), as both alterations coexist in 
muscle from patients with MNGIE. Moreover, mutations 
in ANT1, encoding one adenine nucleotide transporter, and 
in Twinkle, a helicase, have been identifi ed in patients with 
PEO and multiple mtDNA deletions. Mutations in other 
genes controlling the nucleotide pool, as dGK (encoding 
deoxyguanosine kinase) and TK2 (a thymidine kinase), are 
associated with the hepatocerebral and myopathic form of 
mtDNA depletion.
The focus now lies on POLG, the gene encoding the 
mitochondrial polymerase γ, not only because mutations have 
been found in families with PEO, but also because a variety 
of human diseases (Alper’s syndrome, Parkinson’s disease, 
etc) are associated with it (DiMauro 2006c).
Recently, it was demonstrated that two human diseases 
have been associated with impaired mitochondrial fusion, 
a process which requires several proteins, including some 
GTPases, like mitofusin (MFN) and OPA-1. A form of 
autosomal dominant optic atrophy, an important cause of 
blindness in young adults, has documented mutations in the 
OPA-1 gene; moreover, mutations in the MFN2 gene have 
been found in CMT patients (DiMauro et al 2006b).
Detection of pathogenic mtDNA 
mutations
Several different mutations may present themselves as the 
same disease. This almost patient-specifi c characterization of 
mitochondrial diseases makes them very hard to accurately 
diagnose and trace (Figure 1).
Most mtDNA rearrangements are easily detected by 
Southern blot analysis. Total DNA used for these studies 
should preferably be purifi ed from a post-mitotic tissue, 
such as muscle. Restriction enzymes recognizing one unique 
restriction site (such as PvuII) can reveal anomalous bands if 
rearrangements are present (Wong and Boles 2005).
A number of established techniques have been used to 
screen selected regions of mtDNA for the identifi cation of 
pathogenic mutations. If a specifi c mtDNA heteroplasmic 
mutation is suspected, RFLP-PCR can easily reveal the 
presence of mutated mtDNAs. Otherwise, with the advances 
in DNA sequencing techniques, it is now relatively simple 
to sequence the mtDNA in its entirety.
Denaturing high performance liquid chromatography 
(DHPLC) is a method that separates heteroduplex DNA 
molecules in a stationary phase under partially denaturing 
conditions. As pathogenic mtDNA mutations are mostly 
heteroplasmic, DHPLC could detect these different spe-
cies and therefore act as a rapid screening test for mtDNA 
mutations. By eliminating secondary amplification and 
excessive manipulation prior to sequencing, DHPLC is 
a sensitive, rapid and cost-effective method to stream-
line the analysis of mitochondrial heteroplasmy (Biggin 
et al 2005).
Other mtDNA genome-wide sequencing technologies, 
encompassing SNPs microarray, are still dismally limited 
and the sensitivity of heteroplasmy detection is debated 
(Crimi et al 2005).
International Journal of Nanomedicine 2008:3(1)
55
Updating mtDNA research
Mitochondrial therapeutic 
strategies
“Classical” approaches
Heteroplasmy is the biggest problem to overcome in devis-
ing realistic therapies; consequently, progress has been slow. 
To date, therapy regimes remains woefully inadequate, as 
we still treat patients with OXPHOS disorders adding extra 
vitamins and co-factors (such as the coenzyme Q10), even 
if there is some doubt to their effectiveness among clinicians 
(Marriage 2003). The use of these compounds could improve 
the production of energy by the increasing of enzyme activity 
and delaying the disease progression as antioxidant action 
(DiMauro 2007). In addition, repetitive physical exercise 
could be a suitable alternative by causing suffi cient muscle 
damage to result in the sustained recruitment of satellite cells 
(Taivassalo and Haller 2005).
Gene therapy
The inadequacy of current pharmacotherapy for mitochon-
drial disorders has stimulated the development of genetic 
treatments for mtDNA-related diseases.
MtDNA gene therapy may hold promise for ameliorating 
symptoms of patients with mitochondrial disease by taking 
two major approaches: direct genetic modifi cation of a mutant 
mtDNA gene or insertion of a modifi ed mitochondrial protein 
gene into the nucleus.
First experimental issues come from the direct genetic 
modifi cation that encompasses the delivery of restriction 
enzymes into mitochondria, where only the mutant mtDNA, 
but not the wild-type mtDNA, is selectively digested by the 
enzyme. Manipulation of mtDNA heteroplasmy by targeting 
specifi c enzymes into mitochondria could, in theory, lead 
to the exclusive elimination of the mutant mtDNA and 
repopulation by the wild-type mtDNA, resulting in restoration 
of both the intracellular ATP level and a normal clinical 
phenotype (Flierl et al 2003; Bayona-Bafaluy et al 2005).
These approaches are exclusively somatic and will help 
people harboring pathogenic mtDNA mutations but do not 
assure mothers that their children will have normal health. 
Only germ-line therapy, breaking the maternal transmission 
of mutant mtDNAs, could eliminate maternally-inherited 
pathogenic mutations.
Stem cells
Transplant of stem cells is a promising approach to the 
treatment of mitochondrial disorders. In the current year, two 
patients affected by MNGIE have received allogeneic stem 
cell transplantation. The stem cells used in this groundbreak-
ing therapy partially restored TP activity, encouraging rapid 
progresses in this fi eld (Hirano et al 2006).
Embryonic stem cell approaches raise important issues 
about a possible transmission of host cell mitochondrial 
mutations. Since pathogenic heteroplasmic mtDNAs are 
transmissible, the potential exists to create heteroplasmic 
sources of mitochondria in the resultant embryo (Hall et al 
2006). Thus, the prescreening of female oocyte donors for 
mtDNA mutations may need to be considered.
New pharmacological trends
Besides genetic alteration, mitochondrial dysfunction has 
been related to large spectrum of human disorders based on 
metabolic defi cit. The metabolism fall could be of interest in 
the development of a pharmacological mitochondrial-based 
approach in the treatment or prevention of these pathologies. 
In the last years, several studies on the healthy properties 
of food-derived compounds has greatly developed together 
with those on the effect of nutritional intake on the lifespan. 
Resveratrol, a polyphenolic compound mainly present in red 
wine and grape, has been one of these compounds and it has 
been shown to positively interfering with several biological 
and pathological processes such as oxidative stress, cancer 
development and aging (Shankar et al 2007).
Recently, resveratrol has been also demonstrated to act on 
mitochondria in vivo counteracting the effect of high fat diet 
in mice and mimicking the biological processes stimulated by 
caloric restriction. In mice, resveratrol stimulate mitochon-
dria biogenesis and modulate several energy pathways both 
on signal transduction and transcriptional level with enrich-
ment of OXPHOS and ATP synthesis. These events are also 
associated with more healthy changes such as the reduction 
in the plasma levels of insulin and the switch in muscle fi bers 
composition towards more oxidative ones, changes which 
both positive correlate with the prevention and therapy for 
diabetes (Baur et al 2006). Moreover the interference of 
resveratrol with the pathological stress- and insulin-induced 
signaling pathway, which is strongly associated with aging, 
highlight new mechanism for several resveratrol healthy 
properties (Lagouge et al 2006).
Mitochondrial research 
in the new era
Models of mitochondrial diseases
Deleterious mtDNA mutations can cause mitochondrial 
disease in the mouse with a severity and nature analogous 
to that seen in humans. Over the past decade, several mouse 
International Journal of Nanomedicine 2008:3(1)
56
Crimi and Rigolio
models (‘mitomice’) have been developed for both mtDNA 
mutations and nDNA mutations (Wallace 2002). Although 
the mitomice develop phenotypes and inheritance patterns 
somewhat different from humans, they are revolutionizing 
our understanding of mitochondrial diseases and can be used 
to demonstrate the effi cacy of new antioxidant drugs.
Mitomice can be created by introducing genetically distinct 
mtDNAs into the female germ-line, using two basic procedures: 
(i) fusion of enucleated cell cytoplasts bearing mutant mtDNA 
to undifferentiated mouse female stem cells, injection of the 
stem cell cybrids into mouse blastocysts, and implantation 
of the chimeric embryos into a foster mother, and (ii) fusion 
of cytoplasts from mutant cells directly to mouse single-cell 
embryos and implantation of the embryos into the oviduct of 
pseudo-pregnant females. The former method has permitted the 
creation of mouse strains bearing deleterious base substitution 
mutations, while the latter has been used to create mouse strains 
harboring mtDNA deletions (Inoue et al 2006).
In order to render the mitochondrial DNA polymerase error-
prone by eliminating its proofreading activity, a very important 
mouse model was created in 2004 (Trifunovic et al 2004). The 
homozygous knock-in mice expressing a proof-reading-defi cient 
version of POLG show dramatic evidence of premature aging. 
Further studies of this mouse will help in dissecting the patho-
genesis of age-related degenerative phenomena, specifi cally by 
understanding the contribution of mitochondrial factors.
Microarray applications
The interplay between the mtDNA and nDNA encoded 
mitochondrial genes and their role in mitochondrial disor-
ders is still largely unclear. One approach for clarifying the 
“dialogue” between the nuclear and mitochondrial genomes 
and the pathogenesis of mitochondrial diseases has been to 
look at changes in the expression of mitochondrial genes in 
response to specifi c mitochondrial defects.
Recently, microarray technology has been employed to 
study mRNAs amount changes in mitochondrial diseases. 
Gene expression variability has been already described in 
metabolic pathways (included amino acid catabolism, lipid 
peroxidation and energy production) and in many transcripts 
involved in the cell cycle regulation (Crimi et al 2005). 
These evidences underlie the ability of the cell to access to an 
alternative energy resource when a compromised OXPHOS 
occurs. These preliminary microarray studies seem a promis-
ing strategy to identify the presence of coordinate changes 
in mitochondrial gene expression in response to specifi c 
mitochondrial defects. In addition, mtDNA mutations are 
recurrent events in collected body fl uids from patients with 
primary tumor tissues. Thus, mtDNA mutation analysis with 
nanotechnologies-based sequencing tools may provide a 
molecular platform for the early and noninvasively detection 
and prognosis of cancer (Jakupciak et al 2006).
Mitochondrial bioinformatics
New mitochondrial genes discovery
Computational and experimental approaches have a symbiotic 
relationship for identifying mitochondrial proteins (Calvo 
et al 2006). The “Maestro” program integrates eight different 
“predictors”, based on both structural and experimental data, 
to generate scores predicting the likelihood of mitochondrial 
localization. Using this approach, the authors confi dently 
identifi ed nearly 500 mitochondrial proteins that were previ-
ously unidentifi ed, and additionally identifi ed genes associ-
ated with several human mitochondrial diseases.
Online resources
Several databases are frequently updated to garner further 
information on the mitochondria fi eld of research (Chuang 
et al 2006). While online programs are rapidly becoming 
popular tools for the scientific community and offer 
unprecedented accessibility to quality information, there 
are weaknesses inherent the use of these sources by patients 
and/or people without enough competencies regarding the 
mitochondria biology and genetics.
1.  Family Tree DNA “DNA Matches” is the starting point 
before beginning any other searches. The haplogroup 
and mutation results obtained are very useful for broad 
comparison with the worldwide databases noted below. 
Available at: www.familytreedna.com
2.  Mitomap: A Human Mitochondrial Genome Database is a 
compendium of polymorphisms and mutations of the human 
mitochondrial DNA. Available at: www.mitomap.org
3.  Mamit-tRNA provides access to a gene compilation aimed 
at defi ning a consensus of mammalian mitochondrial 
tRNAs structural features. Available at: mamit-trna.u-
strasbg.fr/Summary.html
4.  mtDB is the Human Mitochondrial Genome Database 
with 1711 complete sequences and 839 coding region 
sequences. Available at: www.genpat.uu.se/mtDB/
5.  The POLG mutation database lists all known mutations in 
the coding region of the POLG gene. The POLG mutation 
database describes the heterogeneous clinical pictures 
related with several mutations in this gene. Available at: 
http://dir-apps.niehs.nih.gov/polg
6.  The Human Mitochondrial Protein Database (HMPDb) 
provides comprehensive data on mitochondrial and 
International Journal of Nanomedicine 2008:3(1)
57
Updating mtDNA research
human nuclear encoded proteins involved in mitochon-
drial biogenesis and function. Available at: http://bioinfo.
nist.gov/hmpd
7.  MitEURO is the European consortium of laboratories 
conducting research on mitochondrial biogenesis and 
disease. Available at: www.miteuro.org
8.  MtDNA Test Results Log encourages individuals to submit 
their own information so that, with time, the database will 
grow and become a useful tool to genealogists. Available 
at: www.kerchner.com/cgi-kerchner/mtdna.cgi
9.  Mitosearch directs you to the Family Tree DNA database 
with a free service that permits customers to directly 
upload their results and to add information about the 
genealogy of the earliest known ancestor in the female 
line. Available at: www.mitosearch.org
10.  V-MitoSNP is a new web-based visualization interface of 
mitochondrial Single Nucleotide Polymorphism (mtSNP) 
that clarifi es their strategic infl uence on the development 
of human diseases and cancers. Available at: http://bio.
kuas.edu.tw/v-mitosnp
Conclusions
The application of mitochondrial genomics to modern 
medicine has already begun to offer new clues to the 
development of many ailments and, if speculations on the 
role of mtDNA in human health prove correct, mitochondrial 
biology studies can suggest effective approaches to the 
treatment and prevention of their progression.
Acknowledgments
The Sass Foundation for Medical Research, Inc (Roslyn, New 
York) and “Centro Dino Ferrari” association (Milan, Italy) 
are gratefully acknowledged for their fi nancial support. The 
authors deeply thank Ms Sara Klaus for the stylistic revision. 
There are no confl icts of interest to report.
References
Baur JA, Pearson KJ, Price NL, et al. 2006. Resveratrol improves health and 
survival of mice on high-calorie diet. Nature, 444:337–42.
Bayona-Bafaluy MP, Blits B, Battersby BJ, et al. 2005. Rapid directional 
shift of mitochondrial DNA heteroplasmy in animal tissues by a 
mitochondrially targeted restriction endonuclease. Proc Natl Acad Sci 
USA, 102:14392–7.
Biggin A, Henke R, Bennetts B, et al. 2005. Mutation screening of the 
mitochondrial genome using denaturing high-performance liquid 
chromatography. Mol Genet Metab, 84:61–74.
Brandon M, Baldi P, Wallace DC. 2006. Mitochondrial mutations in cancer. 
Oncogene, 25:4647–62.
Calvo S, Jain M, Xie X, et al. 2006. Systematic identifi cation of human 
mitochondrial disease genes through integrative genomics. Nat Genet, 
38:576–82.
Canter JA, Kallianpur AR, Parl FF, et al. 2005. Mitochondrial DNA 
G10398A polymorphism and invasive breast cancer in African-
American women. Cancer Res, 65:8028–33.
Capri M, Salvioli S, Sevini F, et al. 2006. The genetics of human longevity. 
Ann N Y Acad Sci, 1067:252–63.
Chuang LY, Yang CH, Cheng YH, et al. 2006. V-MitoSNP: visualization of 
human mitochondrial SNPs. BMC Bioinformatics. 15:7–379.
Crimi M, Del Bo R, Galbiati S, et al. 2003. Mitochondrial A12308G 
polymorphism affects clinical features in patients with single mtDNA 
macrodeletion. Eur J Hum Genet, 11:896–8.
Crimi M, O’Hearn SF, Wallace DC, et al. 2005. Molecular research 
technologies in mitochondrial diseases: the microarray approach. 
IUBMB Life, 57:811–8.
DiMauro S, Davidzon G, Hirano M. 2006. A polymorphic polymerase. 
Brain, 129:1637–9.
DiMauro S, Hirano M, Schon EA. 2006. Approaches to the treatment of 
mitochondrial diseases. Muscle Nerve, 34:265–83.
DiMauro S, Mancuso M. 2007. Mitochondrial diseases: therapeutic 
approaches. Biosci Rep, 27:125–37.
DiMauro S. 2006. Mitochondrial myopathies. Curr Opin Rheumatol, 
18:636–41.
Flierl A, Jackson C, Cottrell B, et al. 2003. Targeted delivery of DNA to 
the mitochondrial compartment via import sequence-conjugated peptide 
nucleic acid. Mol Ther, 7:550–7.
Hall VJ, Stojkovic P, Stojkovic M. 2006. Using therapeutic cloning to fi ght 
human disease: a conundrum or reality? Stem Cells, 24:1628–37.
Hirano M, Marti R, Casali C, et al. 2006. Allogeneic stem cell 
transplantation corrects biochemical derangements in MNGIE. 
Neurology, 67:1458–60.
Holt IJ, He J, Mao CC, et al. 2007. Mammalian mitochondrial nucleoids: 
organizing an independently minded genome. Mitochondrion, 7:311–21.
Inoue K, Nakada K, Ogura A, et al. 2000. Generation of mice with 
mitochondrial dysfunction by introducing mouse mtDNA carrying a 
deletion into zygotes. Nat Genet, 26:176–81.
Jakupciak JP, Dakubo GD, Maragh S, et al. 2006. Analysis of potential cancer 
biomarkers in mitochondrial DNA. Curr Opin Mol Ther, 8:500–6.
Kraytsberg Y, Kudryavtseva E, McKee AC, et al. 2006. Mitochondrial DNA 
deletions are abundant and cause functional impairment in aged human 
substantia nigra neurons. Nat Genet, 38:518–20.
Lagouge M, Argmann C, Gerhart-Hines Z, et al. 2006. Resveratrol improves 
mitochondrial function and protects against metabolic disease by 
activating SIRT1 and PGC-1a. Cell, 127:1109–22.
Limongelli A, Schaefer J, Jackson S, et al. 2004. Variable penetrance 
of a familial progressive necrotising encephalopathy due to a novel 
tRNA(Ile) homoplasmic mutation in the mitochondrial genome. J Med 
Genet, 41:342–9.
Marriage B, Clandinin MT, Glerum DM. 2003. Nutritional cofactor 
treatment in mitochondrial disorders. J Am Diet Assoc, 103:1029–38.
Schapira AH. 2006. Mitochondrial disease. Lancet, 368:70–82.
Shankar S, Singh G, Srivastava RK. 2007. Chemoprevention by resveratrol: 
molecular mechanisms and therapeutic potential. Front Biosci, 
12:4839–54.
Taivassalo T, Haller RG. 2005. Exercise and training in mitochondrial 
myopathies. Med Sci Sports Exerc, 37:2094–101.
Trifunovic A, Wredenberg A, Falkenberg M, et al. 2004. Premature ageing 
in mice expressing defective mitochondrial DNA polymerase. Nature, 
429:417–23.
Wallace DC. 2002. Animal models for mitochondrial disease. Methods 
Mol Biol, 197:3–54.
Wallace DC. 2005a. A mitochondrial paradigm of metabolic and 
degenerative diseases, aging, and cancer: a dawn for evolutionary 
medicine. Annu Rev Genet, 39:359–407.
Wallace DC. 2005b. The mitochondrial genome in human adaptive radiation 
and disease: on the road to therapeutics and performance enhancement. 
Gene, 354:169–80.
Wong LJ, Boles RG. 2005. Mitochondrial DNA analysis in clinical labora-
tory diagnostics. Clin Chim Acta, 354:1–20.

