NEWS AND VIEWS
www.nature.com/naturebiotechnology •       MARCH 2003       •        VOLUME 21       •       nature biotechnology
What is the set of proteins that constitute an
organelle in its entirety? Having the answer
to this question is the dream of many cell
biologists. The advent of the ‘omics’ era has
changed the dream to an experimentally
tractable problem. Several systematic
approaches are being pursued to define the
complements of proteins associated with
particular intracellular structures or func-
tions. Two studies published in this issue
1,2
hold the promise that the combination of
biochemical and genetic approaches will be
extremely powerful to obtain a complete pic-
ture of the mitochondrial proteome in the
near future.
The discovery of mitochondria as ubiqui-
tous and defined entities of nucleated cells
dates back to the end of the 19
th
century.
Some 50 years ago, mitochondria were rec-
ognized as the power plants of the cell. In the
late sixties, mitochondrial DNA was discov-
ered, and in the eighties the human mito-
chondrial genome was sequenced. It became
clear that this genome encodes only a hand-
ful of mitochondrial proteins (i.e., 8 in yeast
and 13 in human), whereas the vast majority
of proteins are encoded by the nuclear DNA,
synthesized in the cytosol and imported into
the organelle. At the same time, mitochondr-
ial diseases were found to be due to muta-
tions both in the mitochondrial genome
and, more recently, in the nuclear genome.
In recent years, research on the roles of mito-
chondria in apoptosis, aging, and the patho-
genesis of several diseases (including
Parkinson’s, Alzheimer’s and cancer) has
gained much interest. One can foresee that
elucidation of the mitochondrial proteome
will be the next big step toward an in-depth
understanding of this complex organelle
because it will be the basis for the molecular
dissection of known and novel mitochondri-
al functions in the coming decades.
How many different proteins make up a
mitochondrion? The most comprehensive
study performed so far was aimed at localiz-
ing the proteome in yeast cells. In a large-
scale study, 2744 epitope-tagged yeast pro-
teins covering roughly 45% of the proteome
were immunolocalized. A mitochondrial
location was found for 332 proteins, repre-
senting 13% of the set analyzed. From this
analysis, it can be estimated that yeast mito-
chondria contain about 800 distinct pro-
teins
3
. Given the complexity of differentiated
mammalian cells, the number of distinct
proteins in human mitochondria is likely to
be considerably higher; perhaps between
1000 and 2000, or even higher.
The present paper by Taylor et al.
1
pur-
sues a biochemical approach to obtain the
most complete catalog of mitochondrial
proteins reported so far. Highly purified
mitochondria isolated from human heart
were solubilized with a mild detergent, pro-
tein complexes were partially separated by
sucrose gradient centrifugation, and pro-
teins were resolved by one-dimensional gel
electrophoresis. Mitochondrial proteins
were identified by mass spectrometry com-
bined with rigorous bioinformatic analysis.
Thus, a total of 615 mitochondrial or mito-
chondria-associated proteins were identi-
fied. These include a significant number of
potentially new mitochondrial proteins, the
biochemical functions of which remain to be
defined.
Several similar studies aimed at a system-
atic identification of mitochondrial proteins
by proteomic approaches have been report-
ed. The most comprehensive study reported
so far was on rat liver mitochondria and
yielded a list with 192 proteins
4
. Remarkably,
Taylor et al. were able to triple the size of that
list. There is no doubt that this is a major
achievement. However, at least half of the
mitochondrial proteome remains unknown.
The elucidation of the complete set of mito-
chondrial proteins will certainly be sped up
by the combination of several approaches
coming from different disciplines. Thus, the
accompanying paper by Umezawa and col-
leagues
2
is very timely. These latter
researchers developed an elegant genetic
screening method that holds the potential to
identify novel mitochondrial proteins on a
large scale from cDNA libraries.
Their approach is based on reconstitution
of a split green fluorescent protein (GFP)
reporter in mitochondria. Sequences from
cDNA libraries are randomly fused to the
amino-terminal half of GFP. If the expressed
fusion protein contains targeting information
for the mitochondrial matrix, the GFP moiety
will meet its carboxy-terminal counterpart
there. Full-length GFP is reconstituted in the
matrix by a protein splicing element present
in both reporter constructs. This methodolo-
gy has the advantage that only mitochondria-
positive clones yield a fluorescence signal.
These clones can be isolated by automated
cell sorting, a technique that allows a wide net
to be cast. Relevant genes are subsequently
identified by molecular genetic techniques.
Although the system has not yet been applied
in a comprehensive manner, the authors
demonstrate its suitability for rapid identifi-
cation of novel proteins containing mito-
chondrial targeting information.
239
Figure 1. Two roads towards an elucidation of
the mitochondrial proteome. A biochemical
1
and
a genetic
2
approach promise to define the
complement of proteins that make up a
mitochondrion.
‘Omics’ of the mitochondrion
Two complementary proteomics approaches promise to move us closer to definition of the complete
complement of proteins that make up a mitochondrion.
Benedikt Westermann and Walter Neupert
Benedikt Westermann is a group leader and
Walter Neupert is a professor and director at
the Institut für Physiologische Chemie,
Universität München, Butenandtstr. 5, 81377
München, Germany (neupert@bio.med.
uni-muenchen.de).
©
Bob Cr
imi
©
2003 Nature Pub
lishing Gr
oup  
http://www
.nature
.com/naturebiotec
hnology
nature biotechnology •       VOLUME 21       •       MARCH 2003       •       www.nature.com/naturebiotechnology
NEWS AND VIEWS
240
Both biochemistry and genetics have
proven to be instrumental in identifying
mitochondrial components. However, some
limitations are associated with the strategies
discussed above. Proteins of low abundance
might be missed because they are present in
amounts too low for identification by gel
electrophoresis and mass spectrometry, and
their genes might be underrepresented in
cDNA libraries. Furthermore, both methods
might yield a significant number of false-
positive candidates; mitochondrial prepara-
tions may be contaminated by other
organelles, or some sequences taken out of
their normal context may artificially target a
passenger protein to the mitochondrion.
The genetic system, at least in its present
form, requires that the GFP fusion protein is
exposed to the matrix and thus fails to iden-
tify outer membrane and intermembrane
space proteins as well as certain inner mem-
brane proteins.
Other recent efforts to achieve a genome-
wide identification of mitochondrial com-
ponents have relied on the analysis of yeast
mutant collections defective in mitochondr-
ial functions
5,6
or on the changes of the tran-
scription profiles dependent on respiratory
activity
7,8
. These studies, however, are
restricted to proteins involved in oxidative
phosphorylation and cannot discriminate
between mitochondrial proteins and factors
that are indirectly involved, (e.g., nuclear
transcription factors).
Although comprehensive biochemical
and genetic approaches combined with
computational predictions are providing a
more complete picture of the mitochondrial
proteome, important challenges remain.
First, more information must come from
comparative proteomics: analysis of the pro-
teomes of different organs will be important
in correlating different structures with dif-
ferent sets of proteins. And second, mito-
chondrial proteomes need to be studied
under the various physiological or patholog-
ical conditions to teach us more about the
roles of mitochondria in health and disease.
At the same time, it will be important to
assign biochemical functions to the many
newly identified proteins. Clearly, knowing
the complete set of proteins that constitute a
mitochondrion will open a new era of mito-
chondrial biology.
1. Taylor, S.W. et al. Nat. Biotechnol. 21, 281–286 (2003).
2. Ozawa, T., Sako, Y., Sato, M., Kitamura, T., &
Umezawa, Y. Nat. Biotechnol. 21, 287–293 (2003).
3. Kumar, A. et al. Genes Dev. 16, 707–719 (2002).
4. Fountoulakis, M., Berndt, P., Langen, H., & Suter, L.
Electrophoresis 23, 311–328 (2002).
5. Steinmetz, L.M. et al. Nat. Genet. 31, 400–404
(2002).
6. Dimmer, K.S. et al. Mol. Biol. Cell 13, 847–853 (2002).
7. Hughes, T.R. et al. Cell 102, 109–126 (2000).
8. Epstein, C.B. et al. Mol. Biol. Cell 12, 297–308 (2001).
Type 2 diabetes is one of the world’s most
common diseases, affecting more than 150
million people across the globe, and this
number is predicted to double within the
next 15 years. No cure is available for type 2
diabetes, and management of the disease
typically involves diet control, exercise,
home blood glucose testing, and in some
cases, medication with recombinant insulin
or oral pharmaceuticals. The application of
genomics-based target discovery to type 2
diabetes has long promised to provide new
targets for medical intervention. In this
issue, Chen et al.
1
apply such an approach to
functional screening for secreted proteins
with therapeutic potential in type 2 dia-
betes. Their screens reveal bone morpho-
genetic protein-9 (BMP-9) as a promising
target for further investigation in diabetes
drug discovery.
The epidemic increase in the prevalence
of type 2 diabetes is attributed to a syner-
gism between genetic predisposition and
obesity common in affluent western soci-
ety
2
. However, the root cause of the genetic
predisposition has thus far eluded most sci-
entific enquiry. In type 2 diabetes, elevated
glucose concentration (chronic hyper-
glycemia) results from impaired secretion
of insulin and insulin resistance in target
tissues like muscle and liver. As early as the
mid-19th century, Claude Bernard suggest-
ed that the liver plays a central role in this
scenario
3
. A putative hormone, hepatic
insulin-sensitizing substance (HISS), which
is released from the liver and enhances glu-
cose uptake in peripheral tissues, has been
discussed and debated for half a decade
4
.
The nature of this “hormone” has, however,
remained obscure. The BMP-9 molecule
identified by Chen et al. in this issue repre-
sents a putative HISS.
To identify factors that could influence
key steps involved in diabetic pathogenesis,
Chen et al. first searched for secreted pro-
teins among more than 3 million expressed-
sequence tags (ESTs) from 1,000 different
cDNA libraries in the Human Genome
Sciences (Rockville, MD) database. They
scanned all the resulting open reading
frames (ORFs) starting with an ATG for the
presence of an N-terminal secretory signal
peptide using two different bioinformatic
algorithms: a hidden Markov model and the
SignalP classifier program. Complementary
DNAs of the ESTs that scored positive by
both methods were sequenced to confirm
that they were full-length. Approximately
8,000 sequences containing complete coding
regions, starting with a putative signal pep-
tide, were then assessed in a functional
screening program (Fig. 1).
In the next step, the 8,000 secreted pro-
teins were transiently transfected into
human embryonic kidney (HEK) 293 cells
and the supernatants tested in high-
throughput cell-based assays for their ability
to modulate glucose metabolism. The
researchers assessed the proteins for a role in
suppression of hepatic glucose production
by screening for their ability to inhibit the
expression of a key rate-limiting enzyme in
gluconeogenesis, phosphoenolpyruvate car-
boxykinase (PEPCK) in liver rat hepatoma
H4IIe cells. They also tested their capacity to
activate the serine/threonine kinase Akt
(which stimulates glycogen synthesis in
muscle) and to stimulate the transcription of
two proteins essential for fat synthesis, malic
enzyme (ME) and fatty acid synthase (FAS).
BMP-9 scored as a hit in the assays, with
an observed effect that was comparable to
that seen with insulin. Moreover, purified
recombinant BMP-9 was shown to cause a
sustained lowering of plasma glucose con-
centrations in normal (C57BL/6) and dia-
betic (db/db) mice. In normal mice, there
was a delayed dose-dependent response,
with a hypoglycemic effect 24 hours after
treatment, and in the diabetic mice glucose
concentrations declined within the first 30
hours after treatment. In addition to mimic-
king the action of insulin, BMP-9 also stimu-
lated insulin release in Wistar and Zucker
diabetic rats.
Bringing diabetes therapeutics to the big
screen
Large-scale genomic screening of secreted proteins for therapeutic
potential in diabetes reveals a surprise—bone morphogenetic
protein-9.
Leif Groop
Leif Groop is a professor and department head
at the Department of Endocrinology,
University Hospital MAS, Lund University,
20502 Malmö, Sweden
(Leif.Groop@endo.mas.lu.se).
©
2003 Nature Pub
lishing Gr
oup  
http://www
.nature
.com/naturebiotec
hnology
