Serial Review: The Powerhouse Takes Control of the Cell:
The Role of Mitochondria in Signal Transduction
Serial Review Editor: Victor Darley-Usmar
Mitochondrial proteomics in free radical research
$
Proteomics approaches applied to mitochondria............................................ 176
species; SAM, S-adenosylmethionine; STZ, streptozotocin.
of the Cell: The Role of Mitochondria in Signal Transduction.Q The full list
Free Radical Biology & Medicine 38 (2005) 175–188
www.elsevier.com/locate/freeradbiomed
superoxide dismutase; RNS, reactive nitrogen species; ROS, reactive oxygen
$
This article is part of a series of reviews on bThe Powerhouse Takes Control
Alteration to the mitochondrial proteome under stress: changes in protein levels. . ......................... 179
In vitro studies........................................................... 179
In vivo studies ........................................................... 179
Alteration to the mitochondrial proteome under stress: posttranslational modification to proteins .................. 181
Cysteine modifications....................................................... 181
Tyrosine nitration ......................................................... 183
Electrophilic lipid adduction.................................................... 184
Carbonyl formation ........................................................ 185
Summary ............................................................... 185
Abbreviations: ALDH, aldehyde dehydrogenase; BIAM, biotinylated iodoacetamide; BN-PAGE, blue native polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis; 1(2)-D,
one (two)-dimensional; DNPH, 2,4-dinitrophenylhydrazine; 4-HNE, 4-hydroxynonenal; IBTP, (4, iodobutyl) triphenylphosphonium; IEF, isoelectric focusing;
LC-MS/MS, liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry; MALDI-TOF, matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization time-of-flight; MnSOD, manganese
Shannon M. Bailey
a,
*
, Aimee Landar
b
, Victor Darley-Usmar
b
a
Department of Environmental Health Sciences, School of Public Health, University of Alabama at Birmingham, 1530 3
rd
Avenue South,
Ryals Building, Room 623, Birmingham, AL 35294, USA
b
Department of Pathology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA
Received 23 August 2004; accepted 6 October 2004
Available online 3 November 2004
Abstract
The importance of mitochondrial dysfunction in numerous diseases has long been appreciated. The impact of oxidative and nitrosative
stress on mitochondrial function is complex; however, recent progress in the field using proteomics technologies has begun to shed light on
the molecular defects responsible for mitochondrial and cellular dysfunction. This review focuses on the state-of-the-art technologies being
used and current research endeavors in the field of mitochondrial proteomics with emphasis on those advancements being made in the field of
free radical biology to identify the importance of alterations to the mitochondrial proteome in the development of disease.
D 2004 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Mitochondria; Proteomics; Posttranslational modifications; Free radical; Oxidative and nitrosative stress; Blue native gel electrophoresis; Alcohol
Contents
Introduction .............................................................. 176
0891-5849/$ - see
doi:10.1016/j.freeradbiome
of papers may be
* Correspondin
E-mail addr
found on the home page of the journal.
front matter D 2004 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
d.2004.10.011
g author. Fax: +1 205 975 6341.
ess: sbailey@uab.edu (S.M. Bailey).
tions of stress. The purpose of this review is to present
an overview of the latest research endeavors in the field
[7–9]. To solve this problem alternate protein separation
techniques have been used to elucidate the mitochondrial
of mitochondrial proteomics, with emphasis on those
advancements being made in the field of free radical
biology, to identify the role of posttranslational modifi-
proteome. One approach is the sucrose density gradient
fractionation technique developed by Capaldi and col-
leagues [9–11]. In this technique, mitochondrial extracts
Acknowledgments.................................
References.....................................
Introduction
Mitochondria are recognized as having fundamental
roles in many cellular processes including energy metab-
olism via functioning of the oxidative phosphorylation
system, the Kreb’s cycle, and h-oxidation of free fatty
acids. Mitochondria also house steps critical for heme
biosynthesis, ketone body formation, and urea degradation.
Mammalian mitochondria are unique in that they contain
several copies of their own genome, a circular double-
stranded DNA molecule (mtDNA), which encodes 13
essential polypeptides that constitute complexes I, III, IV,
and V of the oxidative phosphorylation system, 2 large
rRNAs, and 22 tRNAs. As such, the majority of oxidative
phosphorylation system proteins and other mitochondrial
proteins are encoded by the nuclear genome and imported
into mitochondria through a highly regulated system of
inner and outer transmembrane import complexes and
chaperones [1]. Recently though, interest in mitochondrial
physiology has been renewed due to growing evidence
implicating mitochondrial involvement in cellular signaling
pathways through modulation of intracellular calcium
stores, production of reactive species, and the interaction
of nitric oxide (
S
NO) on mitochondrial functions such as
respiration and biogenesis. Given these important roles of
the mitochondrion, it is not surprising that alterations in
mitochondrial function are considered to play key roles in
development of human disease.
As a source for the formation and target of mod-
ifications mediated by reactive oxygen and nitrogen
species (ROS/RNS), the mitochondrion is recognized as
a site critical in cellular responses to oxidative and
nitrosative stress. While numerous mechanisms of oxi-
dant-induced injury have been identified, the impact of
oxidants on the overall content of mitochondrial proteins,
the bmitochondrial proteome,Q is only now being inves-
tigated. It should also be mentioned that the mitochon-
drial proteome is not only determined simply by protein
levels but also by posttranslational modifications to
proteins, which might be significant, particularly in cells
undergoing an oxidative or nitrosative stress. Fortunately,
several significant developments have been made in the
field of proteomics to facilitate the determination of
alterations to the mitochondrial proteome under condi-
S.M. Bailey et al. / Free Radical Biology176
cation of mitochondrial proteins in development of
disease.
.......................... 185
.......................... 185
Proteomics approaches applied to mitochondria
Mitochondria have frequently been at the forefront of
developing technologies and proteomics is not an exception.
In this section we review current approaches but discuss in
detail the more broutineQ approaches accessible to most
research laboratories as outlined in Fig. 1. Two-dimensional
(2-D) gel electrophoresis is currently the primary tool used
for the separation of proteins for proteomic analysis. This
technique combines isoelectric focusing (IEF) in the first
dimension where proteins are separated according to differ-
ences in net charge (isoelectric point), followed by the
separation of proteins based on molecular mass in the second
dimension using standard SDS–PAGE (Fig. 1A). This
technique is capable of resolving hundreds to thousands of
proteins in a complex biological sample on a single 2-D gel,
whichcanthenbeidentifiedbymassspectrometry.Presently,
the mass spectrometry method of choice for identification of
proteins separated by 2-D gels is matrix-assisted laser
desorption ionization time-of-flight (MALDI-TOF) mass
spectrometry due to its high-throughput nature and relatively
low cost. Briefly, protein bspotsQ are excised from gels and
digested with trypsin into peptide fragments, which are then
spotted onto a target plate for identification by MALDI-TOF.
The peptide masses obtained are then entered into a search
engine, e.g., bMASCOT,Q and a database such as NCBI or
SwissProt is queried to match the tryptic peptide fingerprint
to a parent polypeptide. These search engines calculate a
statistical likelihood that the list of submitted peptides
matches that predicted for a protein present in the database.
Thus, peptide mass fingerprinting can provide very good
preliminary data in identifying proteins of interest. Further
confirmation of the identity and amino acid sequence of the
peptide is accomplished using more sophisticated mass
spectrometry techniques like tandem mass spectrometry.
For further information regarding the various mass spec-
trometry techniques used in proteomics research, please refer
to several excellent review articles listed here [2–6].
While conventional 2-D gel electrophoresis is well-suited
to identify changes in the levels of the more hydrophilic
proteins of the mitochondrion, e.g., matrix proteins, the
analysis of membrane proteins is hampered by the fact that
many of these proteins precipitate at the basic end of the IEF
gels and are thus poorly resolved on conventional 2-D gels
& Medicine 38 (2005) 175–188
are loaded onto a 10–35% step fraction sucrose gradient and
centrifuged overnight, and fractions are collected from the
to visualize
IEF
Fig. 1. Scheme illustrating analysis of the mitochondrial proteome. Convention
mitochondria proteins (A), whereas 1-D (B) and 2-D (C) BN-PAGE is used
2-D IEF/SDS–PAGE done on whole rat liver mitochondria using a broad-range
S.M. Bailey et al. / Free Radical Biology
bottom of the tubes after the run. The protein composition of
the fractions can then be assessed by either 1-D or 2-D gel
electrophoresis. By use of this technique, in combination
with mass spectrometry and bioinformatics analyses, more
than 600 proteins were identified as being part of the human
heart mitochondrial proteome [11]. Similar approaches
using affinity fractionation by Lopez and colleagues [7]
have been used to identify close to 200 proteins of the rat
liver mitochondrial proteome.
These novel methodologies have recently been expanded
on by Mootha et al. [12] using an integrated proteomic and
genome profiling technique to elucidate the mitochondrial
proteome of mouse brain, liver, kidney, and heart. In this
study, mitochondrial proteins from each tissue were
solubilized and size separated using gel filtration chroma-
tography into approximately 15–20 fractions, which were
then digested and analyzed by liquid chromatography
tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). By this approach,
4800 proteins were initially identified when the acquired
mass spectra were searched against the NCBI database.
However, this list contained a high level of redundancy as
identical proteins were found in multiple fractions and
different tissues, and corresponded to multiple database
entries for the same protein. To correct for these redun-
dancies, the authors used a bioinformatics permissive
clustering routine to obtain a final set of 399 proteins,
Using these conditions typically 200–300 mitochondrial proteins can be visualized.
membrane. Roman numerals are used to identify the five oxidative phosphorylation
complexes remain intact (B), whereas under denaturing conditions used for 2-D BN-P
molecular weight (C). Thus, those proteins that constitute a particular respiratory complex
expression or posttranslational modifications.
al 2-D IEF/SDS–PAGE is used to generate high-resolution bmapsQ of
changes to proteins present in the inner mitochondrial membrane. (A)
gel from pH 3 to 10 and 10% homogenous SDS–PAGE resolving gel.
& Medicine 38 (2005) 175–188 177
which contained 236 proteins previously identified as
mitochondrial and 163 proteins not previously annotated
to the mitochondrion. Moreover, DNA microarray analysis
demonstrated that mRNA expression levels were for the
most part correlated to the detection of these proteins and
allowed the authors to generate modules or bneighborhoodsQ
of mitochondrial genes, the expression of which is tightly
co-regulated, and thus they share similar functional and
regulatory mechanisms. Mitochondrial neighborhoods
enriched in genes of oxidative phosphorylation, amino acid
metabolism, steriodogenesis, heme biosynthesis, transcrip-
tional regulation, and mtDNA repair were identified. This
study is highly significant because it is the first to combine
state-of-the-art proteomics, genomics, and bioinformatics
technology to elucidate the functional and regulatory
organization of mitochondrial genes.
The results of Mootha et al. [12] do, however, highlight
one important drawback of many proteomics analyses, that
being the underrepresentation of inner mitochondrial
membrane proteins. Analysis of inner membrane proteins
is hampered due to their physical properties [7–9]. For
example, many of the mitochondrial encoded polypeptides
do not resolve well using 2-D gel electrophoresis
techniques as illustrated by the lack of
35
S-labeled
mitochondrial translation products in a conventional 2-D
gel (Fig. 2). To address this issue, our laboratories have
(B, C) BN-PAGE separation of the proteins of the inner mitochondrial
complexes. During nondenaturing 1-D BN-PAGE, the five respiratory
AGE, the individual polypeptides of each complex are resolved based on
are aligned vertically within the gel and can be probed for changes in
used the 2-D blue native gel electrophoresis (BN-PAGE)
technique originally developed by Schagger and von
Jagow [13,14] and recently modified by Brookes and
colleagues [15] to facilitate analyses of the mitochondrial
proteome under stress. In this technique the five oxidative
phosphorylation complexes and other functional complexes
of the mitochondrial inner membrane are separated intact
in the first dimension under nondenaturing conditions (Fig.
1B). After native electrophoresis, the entire vertical lane
containing all the mitochondrial complexes is cut from the
gel, rotated 908, and laid on top of a denaturing SDS–
polyacrylamide gel to resolve the individual polypeptides
of the complexes based on their molecular mass (Fig. 1C).
This procedure in effect produces a two-dimensional
proteomic map of the oxidative phosphorylation system.
Similarly, the individual oxidative phosphorylation com-
plex band can be excised from the first-dimension BN-
polyacrylamide gel and applied to the top of a denaturing
gel to resolve the individual proteins in just that complex
of interest. By use of this approach, changes in the levels
of both mitochondrial and nuclear encoded proteins that
constitute the respiratory complexes following stress can
be assessed. Moreover, because the first dimension BN-
PAGE is done under nondenaturing conditions, information
Given the importance of mitochondrial defects in
numerous human diseases, development of proteomics
strategies to be used in the clinical setting for screening
and diagnosis is important, especially when the size of the
tissue sample obtained from a biopsy is limited. Recent
studies by Capaldi and colleagues have developed a new
microscale procedure, also known as bimmunocapture,Q in
which individual oxidative phosphorylation complexes are
immunoprecipated intact from small amounts of tissue
using monoclonal antibodies against the enzyme [16,17].
With this approach, 42 of the 45 acknowledged complex I
polypeptides were identified using MALDI-TOF and LC-
MS/MS, with minimal contamination by other inner
membrane polypeptides [16]. Similarly, the entire comple-
ment of the F
0
F
1
-ATP synthase complex can be immuno-
precipated in fully functional form from detergent-
solubilized human tissue or cells [17]. Immunocapture
has also been used to purify functional pyruvate dehy-
drogenase from mitochondria [18]. This new approach is
well suited to detect and characterize deficiencies in
protein levels of these complexes, as well as in providing
detailed proteomic maps of these complexes that can be
screened for posttranslational modifications to polypep-
tides. Thus, these protein separation techniques, along
and 2-D
for
by
S.M. Bailey et al. / Free Radical Biology & Medicine 38 (2005) 175–188178
regarding protein:protein interactions and assembly of the
oxidative phosphorylation complexes is retained. This is
particularly important because it enables probing of the
molecular basis by which oxidative and nitrosative stress
might decrease the functioning of the oxidative phospho-
rylation system.
Fig. 2. Visualization of mitochondrial gene products by 1-D SDS–PAGE (A)
of 10
6
/ml and mitochondrially encoded proteins labeled with [
35
S]methionine
synthesis). Cells were lysed and prepared for SDS–PAGE without heat denaturati
mitochondrially encoded proteins were identified by reference to their predicted
specific antibody (Lane 2). The same sample was then subjected to IEF followed
It is clear that very few of the hydrophobic mitochondrially coded proteins enter the
ND, NADH dehydrogenase subunits; A8, ATP synthase subunits; Cyt b, cytochrom
with those described above, are required to define changes
in the levels and modification state of membrane proteins,
which when used in combination with conventional two-
dimensional gel electrophoresis, allow for a more com-
plete study of the entire mitochondrial proteome under
stress.
IEF/SDS–PAGE (B). Cells (Raji lymphocytes) were grown to a density
18 h in the presence of emetine (an inhibitor of mitochondrial protein
on and labeled proteins were detected by autoradiography (Lane 1). The
molecular weights and immunoprecipitation with a cytochrome c oxidase
separation on SDS–PAGE. Mitochondrially encoded subunits are labeled.
second dimension in the 2-D format. CO, cytochrome c oxidase subunits;
e b.
Alteration to the mitochondrial proteome under stress:
changes in protein levels
In vitro studies
Recent advances in the field of proteomics have made it
possible to begin to determine alterations to the mitochon-
drial proteome that occur during disease development. Early
studies designed to investigate alterations to the mitochon-
drial proteome in response to oxidative stress were done
largely using cultured cells exposed to oxidants such as
hydrogen peroxide and tert-butyl-hydroperoxide. Using a
conventional two-dimensional gel approach, Rabilloud et al.
[19] demonstrated that the mitochondrial antioxidants
peroxiredoxin III, thioredoxin 2, and manganese superoxide
dismutase (MnSOD) were induced in Jurkat cells exposed to
both mild and severe oxidative stress. Similarly, Mitsumoto
et al. [20] found that sublethal exposure to hydrogen
peroxide for 1 h increased the levels of 40 mitochondrial
proteins in human endothelial cells, whereas the radical
generator AAPH, the nitric oxide (
S
NO) donors PAPA
NONOate and GSNO, and NaAsO
2
failed to induce these
proteins. Of these 40 proteins, 11 were identified by
MALDI-TOF and include MnSOD, the molecular chaper-
ones mtHsp70 and Hsp60, three citric acid cycle enzymes, a
51 kDa complex I subunit, complex III core protein 2, and
60S mitochondrial ribosomal L7/L12 protein. Interestingly,
their findings indicate that the oxidative stress-induced
increase in heat shock proteins and MnSOD was due to the
accumulation of their corresponding preprotein forms,
which contain the mitochondrial targeting sequence, and is
not the result of increased translation of these proteins. This
finding suggests that dysfunction of the protein import and
processing machinery of the mitochondrion might be
impaired by an oxidative insult and contribute to alterations
to the mitochondrial proteome.
One reason to explain why Mitsumoto et al. [20] did not
observe an alteration to the mitochondrial proteome
following
S
NO exposure is that the exposure was too short
to induce an effect. Studies by Ramachandran and
colleagues [21] demonstrated that chronic exposure of
bovine aortic endothelial cells to the
S
NO donor DETA
NONOate for 24 h decreased the activities of mitochondrial
respiratory complexes I, II, and IV, but had no effect on the
specific activity of the mitochondrial matrix enzyme citrate
synthase. Proteomic analysis of the mitochondria using one-
dimension BN-PAGE demonstrated a significant decrease in
the protein content of these three complexes in
S
NO-treated
cells as compared with untreated controls. Interestingly,
there was no change in the protein levels of the ATP
synthase following chronic exposure to
S
NO, suggesting
that these decreases are not simply due to
S
NO-mediated
inhibition of mitochondrial protein synthesis. It was
speculated that the decreases in these protein complexes
S.M. Bailey et al. / Free Radical Biology
occurred through targeted disruption of the Fe–S and/or
heme molecules in these complexes by
S
NO and other RNS.
Chronic treatment with
S
NO did result in a significant
increase in the labile iron pool, but whether this iron is
derived from the respiratory complexes is not known.
However, mitochondrial involvement was indicated by the
observation that inhibition of mitochondrial protein syn-
thesis eliminated the increase in the labile iron pool
following
S
NO exposure. These results highlight a unique
mechanism whereby RNS can alter the functional compo-
sition of the mitochondrial proteome, not by modulating
synthesis of proteins, but by altering cellular iron
metabolism.
In vivo studies
As a follow-up to these cell culture studies, recent
investigations have focused on the effects of oxidative and
nitrosative stress on the mitochondrial proteome using in
vivo models of stress. Our work has focused on character-
izing the response of the hepatic mitochondria proteome to
chronic alcohol-induced stress. Significant changes in liver
mitochondria physiology occur in response to chronic
alcohol consumption and contribute to the development
of pathology, including increased ROS and RNS produc-
tion [22,23], decreased respiration and ATP synthesis
[24,25], and disrupted fatty acid metabolism [26–28].
Moreover, chronic alcohol exposure induces an increased
sensitivity of the respiratory chain to inhibition by
S
NO,
which we propose contributes to hypoxic liver damage
from alcohol [29]. Although previous studies by Coleman
and Cunningham [30,31] have demonstrated that chronic
alcohol consumption decreases the synthesis of the 13
mitochondrial encoded polypeptides that make up respira-
tory complexes I, III, and IVand the ATP synthase, little or
no information is available regarding the effects of ethanol
on the nuclear encoded respiratory complexes or the
hundreds of other proteins present within liver mitochond-
rion. With the advent of new proteomic technologies it is
now possible to examine the consequences of ethanol-
induced metabolic stress on the mitochondrial proteome.
This is important because these studies will provide
insights into both the mechanisms of pathology and the
adaptation to stress in response to chronic alcohol
exposure.
Using both conventional two-dimensional gel electro-
phoresis and BN-PAGE, we recently reported that levels of
expression of 43 mitochondrial proteins are altered in
response to chronic alcohol consumption [32]. Of these,
levels of 13 were increased and 30 decreased as a
consequence of chronic alcohol consumption. Most impor-
tant was the fact that for 25 of these proteins, levels of
expression were not previously known to have been altered
following chronic exposure to alcohol. For the first time,
both nuclear and mitochondrial encoded gene products of
the oxidative phosphorylation system were found to be
& Medicine 38 (2005) 175–188 179
decreased in response to chronic alcohol exposure. This
finding, in combination with the observation that mitochon-
drial chaperone levels were altered, suggests a possible
assembly defect in the formation of the respiratory
complexes contributing, at least in part, to the ethanol-
related decrease in oxidative phosphorylation. Moreover, we
observed decreased expression of several key enzymes
involved in h-oxidation of fatty acids, which supports the
hypothesis that ethanol-mediated inhibition of PPARa-
mediated pathways contributes to the development of fatty
liver. In addition to this recent work, previous studies by
Cahill and Cunningham [33,34] demonstrated an ethanol-
elicited alteration in the levels of seven specific proteins of
the mitochondrial ribosome. These alterations may be
significant in that they may lead to impaired assembly of
mitochondrial ribosomes and to a decrease in functional
activity [34,35], which will negatively impact energy
metabolism via decreased synthesis of the 13 mitochondrial
gene products. Taken together, these findings demonstrate
the power of proteomics to reveal alterations in biological
processes and molecular targets responsible for ethanol-
induced mitochondrial dysfunction. Furthermore, it is clear
that the response of liver mitochondria to a complex
metabolic stress such as chronic alcohol consumption
channel 1 protein, Hsp60, and Grp75, and significant
upregulation of catalase 1 week post-STZ injection.
Interestingly, many of the alterations in the level of
protein expression were preserved 4 weeks after STZ
treatment. Like the results in our ethanol studies, these
results reveal coordinated up- and downregulation of
mitochondrial proteins in response to both the pathological
and adaptive responses of the metabolic stress induced in
the heart from diabetes.
Recent studies using proteomics approaches in genetic
knockout models have also highlighted the important role of
mitochondrial dysfunction and oxidative stress in pathology
of several diseases. One mouse model that has been used
extensively to investigate the role of mitochondrial oxida-
tive stress in numerous diseases is the MnSOD heteroge-
neous knockout (sod2+/C0), as the homozygous knockout
(sod2C0/C0) typically dies within the first week of life due to
numerous mitochondrial, metabolic, and neurological
defects. Interestingly, survival and neurological damage in
sod2C0/C0mice can be partially rescued by administering the
salen–manganese catalytic antioxidant EUK-8 [37]. Thus, to
gain further insight into mitochondrial targets of oxidative
S.M. Bailey et al. / Free Radical Biology & Medicine 38 (2005) 175–188180
involves changes in the components of multiple biochemical
pathways, and not a single modification of one specific
enzyme (Fig. 3).
Similar alterations in mitochondrial protein expression
were also observed in heart mitochondria from diabetic
rats. Using an in vivo model of diabetes, the streptozo-
tocin (STZ)-treated rat, Turko and Murad [36] demon-
strated an upregulation of several h-oxidation enzymes,
decreases in several of the NADH dehydrogenase complex
polypeptides, down-regulation of voltage-dependent anion
Fig. 3. Summary of alterations to the hepatic mitochondrial proteome in response
levels of these proteins, as well as posttranslational modifications to some of these
development of liver disease. This figure summarizes findings from Refs. [30–34,55]
damage in the brain of sod2C0/C0 mice, Hinerfeld et al. [38]
recently characterized alterations to the mitochondrial
proteome of the cortex of wild-type mice or sod2C0/C0 mice
supplemented with low and high concentrations of EUK-8.
Mitochondrial proteins differentially expressed in the cortex
of sod2C0/C0 mice treated with EUK-8 as compared with
wild-type controls included peroxiredoxin V, 2-oxoglutarate
dehydrogenase (E1k), and the succinate dehydrogenase and
flavoprotein subunit, which were downregulated, and
triosephosphate isomerase and glutathione S-transferase
to chronic alcohol-mediated stress. It is hypothesized that alterations in the
proteins, contributes to alcohol-induced mitochondrial dysfunction and
.
induction of the mitochondrial permeability transition,
alterations in energy metabolism, and protein thiol oxida-
class mu-1, which were upregulated. Decreased expression
of the a-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase subunit and flavopro-
tein subunit of succinate dehydrogenase correlated with
decreased activity of each protein, consistent with previous
studies demonstrating the sensitivity of these mitochondrial
enzymes to oxidative inactivation [39,40].
Another genetic knockout mouse recently used to
investigate alterations in the mitochondrial proteome
associated with a neurological disease is the parkin-
deficient mouse (parkin C0/C0) [41]. Loss of function
mutations in parkin are the major cause of familial
Parkinson’s disease. As the parkin protein has been shown
to function as an E3 ubiquitin ligase [42], it is speculated
that defective parkin will lead to a loss in nigrostriatal
function due to accumulation of proteins normally targeted
for proteasome degradation. Moreover, it has been shown
that parkin is localized to the mitochondrion and may
function to attenuate mitochondria-dependent apoptotic cell
death [43]. Proteomic analyses of the ventral midbrain
region of parkin C0/C0 mice revealed decreases in several
mitochondrial proteins including pyruvate dehydrogenase
subunit E1a1, NADH dehydrogenase 24 and 30 kDa
subunits, and cytochrome c oxidase Vb subunit, as
compared with wild-type mice [44]. Moreover, these
deficiencies in respiratory complex subunits were associ-
ated with decreased state 3 respiration with complex I, II,
and III/IV oxidizable substrates [44]. Thus, in this first
analysis of the mitochondrial proteome using a genetic
knockout mouse model of Parkinson’s disease, a key role
for parkin in the regulation of mitochondrial function in the
nigrostriatum was shown.
Finally, recent work by Mato and colleagues [45]
demonstrated an interaction of the mitochondrial proteome
with the methyl donor and glutathione synthesis intermedi-
ate S-adenosylmethionine (SAM). Methionine adenosyl-
transferase is the sole enzyme responsible for the
biosynthesis of SAM from methionine and ATP. It has been
shown that mice deficient in the methionine adenosyltrans-
ferase 1A isoform (mat1A C0/C0) develop nonalcoholic
steatohepatitis and hepatocellular carcinoma, which is
accompanied by decreased liver SAM levels and oxidative
stress [46,47]. While the mechanism responsible for these
effects is not known, proteomic analyses have identified
altered expression of several mitochondrial proteins in the
mat1A C0/C0 mouse. Depletion of liver SAM in mat1A C0/C0
mice resulted in decreased levels of the mitochondrial
encoded cytochrome c oxidase subunits COX I and II and
the mitochondrial chaperone prohibitin, whereas the ATP
synthase h subunit was upregulated [45]. Associated with
the altered level of expression of these inner membrane
proteins was a decrease in mitochondrial membrane poten-
tial. Alterations in the levels of several other mitochondrial
enzymes involved in fatty acid metabolism, including the
long-chain acyl CoA dehydrogenase and D
3,5
,D
2,4
-dienoyl
S.M. Bailey et al. / Free Radical Biology
CoA isomerase, were also noted in mat1A C0/C0 mice
compared with wild-type controls. Like those changes
tion in pathways of cell death induced by an oxidative or
nitrosative stress [48].
Even though increased levels of oxidized protein thiols
are commonly used as a measure of oxidative damage in
mitochondria, the identity of specific mitochondrial proteins
containing these modified thiols is largely unknown and
identification remains a challenge to researchers. However,
with the advent of new thiol labeling reagents used in
observed in alcohol-induced fatty liver disease [32] (Fig.
3), these changes in the level of expression of mitochon-
drial proteins in the mat1AC0/C0 mouse define a proteomic
profile for the metabolic and pathologic changes to
mitochondria in response to SAM deficiency. Furthermore,
these studies highlight an important role of SAM and
mitochondrial function in the development of fatty liver
diseases.
Alteration to the mitochondrial proteome under stress:
posttranslational modification to proteins
Cysteine modifications
Exposure of mitochondrial proteins to ROS, RNS, and
electrophilic lipids can lead to the posttranslational mod-
ification of amino acid residues, which has the potential to
alter protein structure and/or induce a permanent loss in
function. Recent work also suggests that oxidants can
induce reversible modifications, specifically at cysteine
residues, which may function to: (1) protect cysteines from
irreversible modifications or boveroxidationQ and (2) mod-
ulate protein function in response to stress. Thus, oxidative,
nitrosative, or alkylation reactions can trigger signaling
cascades that result in the activation of genes involved in
cellular stress responses. Whether posttranslational modifi-
cation to mitochondrial proteins plays a role in the adaptive
response of the cell to stress is not known. Because
alterations in the redox status of protein thiols are typically
critical in regulating a protein’s function, the identification
of these proteins and the type of modifications present is of
significant interest.
Reversible modifications to thiols that are thought to
play key roles in modulating a protein’s function include the
formation of nitrosothiols (P-SNO), sulfenic acids (P-SOH),
and protein mixed disulfides with low-molecular-weight
thiols such as glutathione (P-SSG) (Fig. 4). In contrast,
cysteine residues can be irreversibly oxidized to higher
oxidation states such as sulfinic (P-SO
2
H) and sulfonic (P-
SO
3
H) acids by ROS and RNS (Fig. 4). Each of these thiol
modifications has the potential to elicit a biological
response that might disrupt mitochondrial function. Indeed,
emerging evidence emphasizes a key link between the
& Medicine 38 (2005) 175–188 181
combination with various proteomics approaches, the
identification of specific mitochondrial proteins containing
thiols susceptible to oxidative modification is becoming
feasible as discussed in [49]. In general, these approaches
use thiol labeling reagents like biotinylated iodoacetamide
(BIAM) [50], which binds to reduced thiols but not oxidized
Fig. 4. Modification of mitochondrial proteins by interactions with ROS,
RNS, and electrophilic lipids. Superoxide and
S
NO can react to form
ONOO
-
, which can mediate nitration of tyrosine residues (P-NO
2
) and
nitrosation (P-SNO) of thiols. Peroxynitrite can initiate the sequential
oxidation of thiols to sulfenic (P-SOH), sulfinic (P-SO
2
H), and sulfonic (P-
SO
3
H) acid forms. Superoxide and hydrogen peroxide can also mediate the
oxidation of thiols. ROS/RNS can also oxidize proteins to generate
carbonyl groups (P-CHO). Initiation of lipid peroxidation by ROS/RNS
generates electrophilic lipids like 4-HNE that adduct with histidine,
cysteine, and lysine residues in proteins. Reaction between protein thiols
and low-molecular-weight thiols like GSH can yield mixed disulfides. It is
important to note that these reactions of ROS/RNS can occur with
membrane, as well as matrix proteins in mitochondria.
S.M. Bailey et al. / Free Radical Biology182
or modified thiols in proteins. These labeled proteins can
then be visualized after gel electrophoresis and immuno-
blotting using streptavidin conjugated to HRP. Thus,
proteins containing oxidized thiols that have been oxidized
and/or modified by an oxidative or nitrosative stress can be
identified by decreased labeling with the thiol reagent. The
feasibility of this approach for detecting oxidized
mitochondrial proteins following exposure to nitrosative
stress is illustrated in recent work by Shiva et al. [39]
demonstrating the oxidation of mitochondrial protein thiols
after exposure to Angeli’s salt, which is a donor of nitroxyl,
a very potent RNS.
An alternate approach that can be used to detect S-
nitrosated proteins, is the three-step bbiotin-switchQ method
developed by Synder and colleagues [51,52],which
converts nitrosated cysteines to biotinylated cysteines that
can be detected and identified following purification with
streptavidin–agarose. Thus, when using the bbiotin-switchQ
method oxidized proteins are detected by increased la-
beling of proteins. Using this technique, Stamler and
colleagues [53] identified several protein targets of S-
nitrosation in isolated mitochondria including dihydro-
lipoamide dehydrogenase, hydroxymethylglutaryl-CoA
synthase, and sarcosine dehydrogenase. While the identi-
fication of these S-nitrosated proteins in mitochondria is
important, the functional significance of these modifica-
tions remains to be determined, as exposure to high
concentrations of NO
+
donors failed to inhibit the activity
of these enzymes [53].
One disadvantage of the techniques described above is
that these thiol labeling strategies can be used only in
mitochondrial extracts as these reagents are membrane
impermeable. Thus, they provide no information regarding
the redox status of mitochondrial protein thiols in fully
functional, respiring mitochondria. To circumvent this
problem, Murphy and colleagues [54] developed a novel
compound, (4-iodobutyl) triphenylphosphonium (IBTP),
which selectively labels reduced protein thiol groups in
functional mitochondria. IBTP is a lipophilic cation that
accumulates several hundred-fold in mitochondria as a
function of the large membrane potential across the inner
mitochondrial membrane, and has been shown to uniformly
label mitochondria and co-localize with mitochondrial
enzymes [54]. Once IBTP is accumulated into mitochon-
dria, protein thiolate groups displace the iodo portion of
IBTP and form stable phosphonium thioether linkages.
These IBTP-labeled proteins can then be visualized after gel
electrophoresis and immunblotting with an antibody made
against the triphenylphosphonium group. Thus, as with
BIAM labeling, proteins containing oxidized or modified
thiols can be identified following an oxidative or nitrosative
stress by decreased labeling with IBTP. Using this approach
Lin et al. [54] demonstrated that the redox thiol status of
numerous mitochondrial proteins is modified by exposure to
various oxidative/nitrosative stress inducing agents such as
peroxynitrite (ONOO
C0
), diamide, and tert-butyl hydro-
peroxide. Thus, this approach has the potential to enable
the detection of the thiol redox state of specific mitochon-
drial proteins in fully functional mitochondria and cells.
Recently, our laboratories have used this approach to
identify specific mitochondrial proteins that have an altered
thiol status as a consequence of chronic alcohol-induced
oxidative stress [55]. In these studies, mitochondria isolated
from livers of animals fed control and ethanol-containing
liquid diets were incubated with IBTP under State 3
respiration conditions. By labeling respiring mitochondria,
we were able to identify those reactive thiols that are exposed
in mitochondria during oxidative phosphorylation. Using
conventional 2-D gel electrophoresis, 40 individual protein
spots immunoreactive for IBTP were observed in immuno-
blots from mitochondria isolated from livers of control and
ethanol-fed animals. Of these, 7 IBTP-labeled proteins were
identified by mass spectrometry, with 2 proteins, low-K
m
mitochondrial aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) and the
molecular chaperone hsp70, possessing a significant and
reproducible decrease in IBTP labeling in mitochondria from
ethanol-fed animals. Analysis of the low-K
m
ALDH showed
a significant decrease in the specific activity of enzyme in
mitochondria isolated from ethanol-fed animals as compared
with controls, which is not restored to control levels
following treatment with h-mercaptoethanol. The inability
& Medicine 38 (2005) 175–188
of a strong thiol reductant to restore activity indicates an
irreversible modification to the active site cysteine of ALDH
that may have occurred following chronic alcohol con-
sumption. Oxidative modification and subsequent inactiva-
tion of the low-K
m
ALDH represents a specific molecular
mechanism that might contribute to overall mitochondrial
dysfunction in response to chronic alcohol exposure due to
the inability to detoxify the highly reactive and toxic
aldehyde species, acetaldehyde. Taken together, the findings
from our work and those of others have demonstrated that
experimental protocols have been developed that will
enhance efforts to establish a clear link between the
posttranslational modification of mitochondrial protein
thiols and the development of disease, where oxidative and
nitrosative stress is implicated in the etiology.
While modification of cysteine residues has been shown
to alter mitochondrial function, other types of posttransla-
tional modification, including tyrosine nitration, protein
carbonylation, and adduction via electrophilic lipids, may
elicit many of the same detrimental effects on mitochondrial
function in response to stress. In general, it is thought that
these modifications are responsible for the permanent loss of
function and removal of the damaged proteins. Evidence for
the presence of each of these specific modifications to
mitochondrial proteins following various in vitro and in
vivo exposures to oxidative or nitrosative stress has been
reported and is discussed in the following sections.
Tyrosine nitration
The detrimental effects of
S
NO on mitochondrial
function stem largely from the diffusion of
S
NO into
mitochondria and the formation of more reactive secondary
intermediates like ONOO
C0
and nitrogen dioxide (
S
NO
2
),
which can nitrate tyrosine residues within mitochondrial
proteins (Fig. 4). It should be stressed though that not all
effects of RNS on proteins are mediated through nitro-
tyrosine formation, as RNS can affect mitochondrial
function through the modification of protein thiols as
discussed above. Similarly,
S
NO and, in some cases,
ONOO
C0
can mediate direct effects on protein function via
reaction with iron in heme and Fe/S center-containing
proteins. Early studies indicated that ONOO
C0
binds to and
inactivates the Fe/S centers of mitochondrial complex I [56]
and that
S
NO may interact and inhibit complex III [57].
S
NO also plays a key role in regulating mitochondrial
respiration through reversible binding with cytochrome c
oxidase. Exposure to low concentrations of
S
NO results in
the reversible inhibition of complex IV activity due to
competition of
S
NO with oxygen at the binuclear center of
the enzyme [57–59]. Taken together, these examples
illustrate that RNS can modulate the mitochondrial pro-
teome through a variety of mechanisms including inter-
actions with heme iron, Fe/S centers, and cysteine residues,
as well as tyrosine residues. A brief overview of the
progress made in recent years to identify mitochondrial
S.M. Bailey et al. / Free Radical Biology
proteins that constitute the bnitrotyrosine proteomeQ is
presented in the subsequent paragraphs.
Since the influential work of Beckman, Ischiropoulos,
and colleagues [60,61] demonstrating the ability of ONOO
C0
and other RNS to cause the nitration of tyrosine residues,
numerous papers have been published illustrating that the
mitochondrion is a target of these nitrating species. Before
the advent of proteomics technologies, early work in this
field focused on identifying nitrated mitochondrial proteins
one at a time. With this approach several mitochondrial
proteins have been found to be nitrated in vivo and in vitro
by exposure to RNS and include MnSOD [62–65],ATP
synthase [66,67], and cytochrome c [68–71]. Interestingly,
Castro et al. [72] have extended their studies on cytochrome
c nitration and found that cytochrome c can serve as a
catalyst for both NO
2
C0
-andH
2
O
2
-mediated nitration
reactions of proteins. These results are significant as they
demonstrate for the first time the possibility of a specific
protein functioning as a catalyst of nitration reactions not
only in the mitochondrial compartment but also in the
cytosol following the release of cytochrome c during
apoptosis. The functional significance of nitrated cyto-
chrome c on mitochondrial function and cell signaling
pathways remains to be determined.
Since these earlier studies, numerous papers have been
published using proteomic methods to identify nitrated
mitochondrial proteins under both normal and pathophysio-
logical conditions and from endogenous and exogenous
sources of RNS. Typically, these studies have detected
nitrated proteins by using antibodies directed against the 3-
nitrotyrosine moiety. While many of these studies have
observed an increase in nitrated proteins following disease
or nitrosative insult, few studies have been successful in
identifying the nitrated proteins or, more importantly, the
specific modified tyrosine residue within the protein. This
lack of information hampers the understanding of the role
tyrosine nitration plays in mitochondrial physiology under
both healthy and diseased conditions.
Although the field is in a nascent stage, recent studies by
Stuehr and colleagues have gone a long way to increase our
understanding of the impact of tyrosine nitration in cellular
and mitochondrial function. Using an in vivo model of
inflammation, Aulak et al. [73] identified more than 40 liver
and lung proteins that were nitrated on an exposure to
lipopolysaccharide. Proteins identified include voltage-
dependent anion channel 1, MnSOD, and aconitase, as well
as numerous enzymes involved in glycolysis, the citric acid
cycle, and h-oxidation of fatty acids. Similar findings were
obtained by Turko et al. [74] in an in vivo model of diabetes
when heart mitochondria proteins were probed for nitro-
tyrosine modifications. Moreover, studies by Brookes et al.
[75] demonstrated that several respiratory chain subunits
and dehydrogenases involved in intermediary metabolism
were endogenously nitrated or nitrated on exposure to
ONOO
C0
. More interestingly in this study was the observa-
tion that, on induction of the mitochondrial permeability
& Medicine 38 (2005) 175–188 183
transition, additional mitochondrial targets of nitration were
revealed and included glutamate dehydrogenase and two
CoA-containing enzymes [75]. Taken together, these results
suggest a role for tyrosine nitration in modulating key
mitochondrial functions in energy metabolism, fatty acid
metabolism, and apoptosis following oxidative/nitrosative
insults.
Following up on their earlier work, Stuehr and colleagues
have provided evidence to support the possibility that there
is a regulatory cycle of nitration and denitration of proteins
within mitochondria that functions like the classic tyrosine
phosphorylation signaling model [76,77]. By use of isolated
mitochondria, the nitration state of several mitochondrial
proteins involved in energy metabolism and antioxidant
pathways was found to be rapidly modulated in a model of
hypoxia–reoxygenation and to be dependent on the oxygen
tension and not protein degradation pathways [76]. Whether
these data are sufficient to support the idea of a nitration/
denitration cycle functioning within mitochondria and
playing a regulatory role in metabolism is not clear at
present; however, these data indicate that protein nitration
may be more than just a bfingerprintQ or bbiomarkerQ of
oxidative and nitrosative stress.
Recent studies have also begun to identify the specific
tyrosine residues within mitochondrial proteins that are
nitrated on exposure to RNS. Using both immunologic and
mass spectrometry approaches, Murray et al. [78] demon-
strated that in vitro exposure of intact mitochondria to
ONOO
C0
resulted in the selective nitration of several
complex I subunits, which was associated with a loss in
enzyme activity. Tandem mass spectrometry analysis
demonstrated that subunits NDUFB4 and NDUFA6 con-
tained the highest degree of nitration, with Tyr
122
in
NDUFA6 being the most reactive and Tyr
46
,Tyr
50
, and
Tyr
51
being the most heavily nitrated in the NDUFB4
subunit. In addition to these findings, subunits of the ATP
synthase were found to be nitrated, along with the oxidation
of Trp
61
and Met
68
residues in the 17.2 kDa subunit of
complex I. These findings support those reported earlier for
the unique susceptibility of Trp and Met residues to
oxidation in several mitochondrial proteins identified in
healthy human heart tissue [79]. Identification of these and
other reactive tyrosine residues that are susceptible to
oxidation and nitration will allow for a more complete
understanding of the role of posttranslational modifications
in mitochondrial function.
Electrophilic lipid adduction
In addition to the oxidation of proteins via classic ROS
and RNS, several lines of evidence suggest that electrophilic
lipids generated during enzymatic or nonenzymatic metab-
olism of polyunsaturated fatty acids can also act to
posttranslationally modify proteins. Examples of reactive
aldehyde intermediates that have been shown to adduct to
proteins include malondialdehyde, acetaldehyde, and 4-
S.M. Bailey et al. / Free Radical Biology184
hydroxynonenal [80–83], as well as the more recently
recognized reactions with the cyclopentenone prostaglan-
dins [84,85]. Adduction occurs largely at nucleophilic
centers within proteins, particularly at cysteine, lysine, and
histidine residues [86] (Fig. 4). While it is generally thought
that adduction of lipid peroxidation products to proteins is
considered an important mediator of cellular damage due to
disruption of protein function, recent studies highlight these
oxidizing lipids as being important activators of signal
transduction pathways involved in the adaptation to stress
[87].
Since the initial observations of Szweda and colleagues
[88] that modification of mitochondrial proteins by the lipid
peroxidation product 4-hydroxynonenal (4-HNE) contrib-
utes to mitochondrial dysfunction, several studies have been
conducted to identify 4-HNE-modified proteins in mito-
chondria with limited success. Most studies have focused on
the inactivation of a-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase by 4-
HNE through its interaction with sulfhydryl groups present
within the lipoic acid moiety in the enzyme [40]. The
susceptibility of this mitochondrial enzyme to inactivation
has also been verified in in vivo models of oxidative stress
[89] and via alterations in mitochondrial glutathione status
[90]. In contrast, recent work by Hagen and colleagues
demonstrated that while 4-HNE adduction to rat heart a-
ketoglutarate dehydrogenase increases with age, this is not
associated with a decrease, but rather an increase, in
enzymatic activity due to a lowered K
m
for a-ketoglutarate
in older animals [91]. These conflicting results demonstrate
the critical need to determine whether these modifications
truly have an impact on protein functionality and cellular
pathways of metabolism or are simply bystander effects
from oxidative insult.
Studies conducted by Chen et al. [92,93] have demon-
strated the formation of malondialdehyde and 4-HNE
protein adducts to subunits of cytochrome c oxidase in
liver from animals exposed to ethanol. More important is the
observation that formation of these adducts resulted in a
decrease in oxidase activity, thus demonstrating a functional
role of these adducts in ethanol-induced mitochondrial
dysfunction. Additional studies by this group have demon-
strated that 4-HNE adduct formation with cytochrome c
oxidase subunits also plays a role in enzyme inactivation
from cardiac reperfusion injury [94]. Similarly, recent work
by Papaconstantinou and co-workers has shown the
presence of endogenous levels of 4-HNE modified subunits
of complexes I, III, IV, and V, as well as the adenine
nucleotide transporter and the voltage-dependent anion
channel in bovine heart submitochondrial particles analyzed
by BN-PAGE [95]. Inactivation of the citric acid cycle
enzyme isocitrate dehydrogenase by 4-HNE has also been
shown in an animal model of hypertension and cardiac
hypertrophy [96]. Like those findings presented for nitration
reactions, it appears that many of the same proteins and
enzymes involved in mitochondrial energy metabolism are
also susceptible to modification by reactive aldehyde
& Medicine 38 (2005) 175–188
species. Whether this is a consequence of special character-
istics of these proteins that make them susceptible to
containing lipids (i.e., 4-HNE) or sugars (Fig. 4). In general
the detection of protein carbonyls is done after their
to incorporate this knowledge into a framework whereby
This work was funded by NIH Grants AA13682 and
derivatization with 2,4-dinitrophenylhydrazine (DNPH) to
generate hydrazones that can be detected spectrophoto-
metrically. While this assay has been adapted to an
electrophoresis/immunblotting approach as a anti-DNPH
antibody is available to detected the DNPH-modified
proteins [100] few studies have been successful in identify-
ing specific proteins that have an altered carbonyl status
following stress [101,102], with no mitochondrial proteins
identified. However, with the development of newly
improved strategies and reagents to label carbonylated
proteins, the number of proteins identified as containing
this posttranslational modification is likely to grow rapidly
[103–105]. Indeed, recent work by Choksi et al. [95]
identified several carbonylated proteins within respiratory
complexes I, II, III, and V of heart mitochondria. While
these are important new findings for the field, the relevance
of these modifications to normal functioning of
mitochondria has not been established.
Summary
Recent advancements in proteomics technologies have
now made it possible to critically examine the molecular
targets within the mitochondrion that contribute to cellular
dysfunction. While a tremendous amount of progress has
been made in this area in recent years, it should be pointed
out that there are still deficiencies in these techniques and
approaches that greatly impede these analyses. For
example, progress in the field is hampered by the fact
that only a small number of modifications can be detected
in proteins due to the limited number of antibodies that are
available to detect these modifications. Similarly, the
specificity of these antibodies is an issue, as it is likely
that differences in epitope specificity pose a far bigger
problem than generally acknowledged. This is especially
oxidation or simply because they are present in high
abundance and thus represent a large btargetQ that is hard
for oxidants to miss is not clear. Either way the evidence is
strong to suggest that these modifications have the potential
to play critical roles in altering mitochondrial function under
both normal and pathological conditions.
Carbonyl formation
Measurement of protein carbonyls has been used for
many years as a general marker of protein oxidation and
damage from oxidative stress since the seminal work of
Levine, Berlett, and Stadtman illustrating its utility [87,97–
99]. Carbonyl groups can be introduced into proteins via the
direct oxidation of the protein backbone, oxidation of lysine,
arginine, and histidine residues, and adduction by carbonyl-
S.M. Bailey et al. / Free Radical Biology
the case with antibodies directed against 3-nitrotyrosine
residues and 4-HNE protein adducts. And, even though
AA15172 (S.M.B.) and AA13395 and HLO70610 (V.D.U.)
and by a grant from the Alcoholic Beverage Medical
Research Foundation (S.M.B.).
References
[1] Wiedemann, N.; Frazier, A. E.; Pfanner, N. The protein import
machineryofmitochondria.J.Biol.Chem.279:14473–14476;2004.
[2] Kim, H.; Page, G. P.; Barnes, S. Proteomics and mass spectrometry
in nutrition research. Nutrition 20:155–165; 2004.
[3] Aebersold, R.; Mann, M. Mass spectrometry-based proteomics.
Nature 422:198–207; 2003.
[4] Sechi, S. Mass spectrometric approaches to quantitative proteomics.
Contrib. Nephrol. 141:59–78; 2004.
[5] Lill, J. Proteomic tools for quantitation by mass spectrometry. Mass
Spectrom. Rev. 22:182–194; 2003.
[6] Wu, C. C.; Yates III, J. R. The application of mass spectrometry to
membrane proteomics. Nat. Biotechnol. 21:262–267; 2003.
[7] Lopez, M. F.; Kristal, B. S.; Chernokalskaya, E.; Lazarev, A.;
Shestopalov, A. I.; Bogdanova, A.; Robinson, M. High-throughput
profiling of the mitochondrial proteome using affinity fractionation
and automation. Electrophoresis 21:3427–3440; 2000.
[8] Santoni, V.; Molloy, M.; Rabilloud, T. Membrane proteins and
proteomics: un amour impossible? Electrophoresis 21:1054–1070;
2000.
[9] Hanson, B. J.; Schulenberg, B.; Patton, W. F.; Capaldi, R. A. A
novel subfractionation approach for mitochondrial proteins: a three-
these complex functional and regulatory alterations in the
mitochondrial proteome can be used to increase our under-
standing and treatment of human disease.
Acknowledgments
significant advancements have been made in instrumenta-
tion, mass spectrometry is still not sufficiently sensitive to
detect, quantify, and localize these posttranslational mod-
ifications,particularlywhenthesealterationsmayencompass
only a few amino acids within the protein. Thus, quantifica-
tion of the degree of modification within a protein remains a
challenge. However, even with these limitations, cutting-
edge research in the field has now begun to identify specific
molecular modifications to selective amino acids within
mitochondrial proteins that occur from exposure to ROS,
RNS, and electrophilic lipids under both normal and
pathophysiological conditions.
Previously, oxidative modification of proteins was
thought to represent a detrimental process in which the
modified proteins were irreversibly inactivated, leading to
cellular dysfunction. While this is still the case in many
situations, it is now clear that posttranslational modifications
of mitochondrial proteins can be specific and reversible and,
thus, may play a key role in normal mitochondrial
physiology. Thus, the challenge for future studies will be
& Medicine 38 (2005) 175–188 185
dimensional mitochondrial proteome map. Electrophoresis 22:
950–959; 2001.
[10] Taylor, S. W.; Warnock, D. E.; Glenn, G. M.; Zhang, B.; Fahy, E.;
Gaucher, S. P.; Capaldi, R. A.; Gibson, B. W.; Ghosh, S. S. An
alternative strategy to determine the mitochondrial proteome using
sucrose gradient fractionation and 1D PAGE on highly purified
human heart mitochondria. J. Proteome Res. 1:451–458; 2002.
[11] Taylor, S. W.; Fahy, E.; Zhang, B.; Glenn, G. M.; Warnock, D. E.;
Wiley, S.; Murphy, A. N.; Gaucher, S. P.; Capaldi, R. A.; Gibson, B.
W.; Ghosh, S. S. Characterization of the human heart mitochondrial
proteome. Nat. Biotechnol. 21:281–286; 2003.
[12] Mootha, V. K.; Bunkenborg, J.; Olsen, J. V.; Hjerrild, M.;
Wisniewski, J. R.; Stahl, E.; Bolouri, M. S.; Ray, H. N.; Sihag, S.;
Kamal, M.; Patterson, N.; Lander, E. S.; Mann, M. Integrated
analysis of protein composition, tissue diversity, and gene regulation
in mouse mitochondria. Cell 115:629–640; 2003.
[13] Schagger, H.; von Jagow, G. Blue native electrophoresis for isolation
of membrane protein complexes in enzymatically active form. Anal.
Biochem. 199:223–231; 1991.
[14] Schagger, H. Electrophoretic techniques for isolation and quan-
tification of oxidative phosphorylation complexes from human
tissues. Methods Enzymol. 264:555–566; 1996.
[15] Brookes, P. S.; Pinner, A.; Ramachandran, A.; Coward, L.; Barnes,
S.; Kim, H.; Darley-Usmar, V. M. High throughput two-dimensional
blue-native electrophoresis: a tool for functional proteomics of mito-
chondria and signaling complexes. Proteomics 2:969–977; 2002.
[16] Murray, J.; Zhang, B.; Taylor, S. W.; Oglesbee, D.; Fahy, E.;
Marusich, M. F.; Ghosh, S. S.; Capaldi, R. A. The subunit
composition of the human NADH dehydrogenase obtained by rapid
one-step immunopurification. J. Biol. Chem. 278:13619–13622;
2003.
[17] Aggeler, R.; Coons, J.; Taylor, S. W.; Ghosh, S. S.; Garcia, J. J.;
Capaldi, R. A.; Marusich, M. F. A functionally active human F1F0
ATPase can be purified by immunocapture from heart tissue and
fibroblast cell lines: subunit structure and activity studies. J. Biol.
Chem. 277:33906–33912; 2002.
[18] Lib, M.; Rodriguez-Mari, A.; Marusich, M. F.; Capaldi, R. A.
Immunocapture and microplate-based activity measurement of
mammalian pyruvate dehydrogenase complex. Anal. Biochem.
314:121–127; 2003.
[19] Rabilloud, T.; Heller, M.; Rigobello, M. P.; Bindoli, A.; Aebersold,
R.; Lunardi, J. The mitochondrial antioxidant defence system and its
response to oxidative stress. Proteomics 1:1105–1110; 2001.
[20] Mitsumoto, A.; Takeuchi, A.; Okawa, K.; Nakagawa, Y. A subset of
newly synthesized polypeptides in mitochondria from human
endothelial cells exposed to hydroperoxide stress. Free Radic. Biol.
Med. 32:22–37; 2002.
[21] Ramachandran, A.; Ceaser, E.; Darley-Usmar, V. M. Chronic
exposure to nitric oxide alters the free iron pool in endothelial cells:
role of mitochondrial respiratory complexes and heat shock proteins.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 101:384–389; 2004.
[22] Bailey, S. M.; Cunningham, C. C. Acute and chronic ethanol
increases reactive oxygen species generation and decreases viability
in fresh, isolated rat hepatocytes. Hepatology 28:1318–1326; 1998.
[23] Bailey, S. M.; Cunningham, C. C. Effect of dietary fat on chronic
ethanol-induced oxidative stress in hepatocytes. Alcohol. Clin. Exp.
Res. 23:1210–1218; 1999.
[24] Cunningham, C. C.; Coleman, W. B.; Spach, P. I. The effects of
chronic ethanol consumption on hepatic mitochondrial energy
metabolism. Alcohol Alcohol. 25:127–136; 1990.
[25] Hoek, J. B. Mitochondrial energy metabolism in chronic alcoholism.
Curr. Top. Bioenerg. 17:197–241; 1994.
[26] Koteish, A.; Diehl, A. M. Animal models of steatosis. Semin. Liver
Dis. 21:89–104; 2001.
[27] Jaeschke, H.; Gores, G. J.; Cederbaum, A. I.; Hinson, J. A.; Pessayre,
D.; Lemasters, J. J. Mechanisms of hepatotoxicity. Toxicol. Sci.
65:166–176; 2002.
S.M. Bailey et al. / Free Radical Biology186
[28] Baraona, E.; Lieber, C. S. Alcohol and lipids. Recent Dev. Alcohol.
14:97–134; 1998.
[29] Venkatraman, A.; Shiva, S.; Davis, A. J.; Bailey, S. M.; Brookes, P.
S.; Darley-Usmar, V. Chronic alcohol consumption increases the
senstivity of rat liver mitochondrial respiration to inhibition by nitric
oxide. Hepatology 38:141–147; 2003.
[30] Coleman, W. B.; Cunningham, C. C. Effects of chronic ethanol
consumption on the synthesis of polypeptides encoded by the hepatic
mitochondrial genome. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1019:142–150;
1990.
[31] Coleman, W. B.; Cunningham, C. C. Effect of chronic ethanol
consumption on hepatic mitochondrial transcription and translation.
Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1058:178–186; 1991.
[32] Venkatraman, A.; Landar, A.; Davis, A. J.; Chamlee, L.; Sanderson,
T.; Kim, H.; Page, G.; Pompilius, M.; Ballinger, S.; Darley-Usmar,
V.; Bailey, S. M. Modification of the mitochondrial proteome in
response to the stress of ethanol-dependent hepatotoxicity. J. Biol.
Chem. 279:22092–22101; 2004.
[33] Cahill, A.; Cunningham, C. C. Effects of chronic ethanol feeding on
the protein composition of mitochondrial ribosomes. Electrophoresis
21:3420–3426; 2000.
[34] Cahill, A.; Baio, D. L.; Ivester, P. I.; Cunningham, C. C. Differential
effects of chronic ethanol consumption on hepatic mitochondrial and
cytoplasmic ribosomes. Alcohol. Clin. Exp. Res. 20:1362–1367;
1996.
[35] Patel, V. B.; Cunningham, C. C. Altered hepatic mitochondrial
ribosome structure following chronic ethanol consumption. Arch.
Biochem. Biophys. 398:41–50; 2002.
[36] Turko, I. V.; Murad, F. Quantitative protein profiling in heart
mitochondria from diabetic rats. J. Biol. Chem. 278:35844–35849;
2003.
[37] Melov, S.; Doctrow, S. R.; Schneider, J. A.; Haberson, J.; Patel, M.;
Coskun, P. E.; Huffman, K.; Wallace, D. C.; Malfroy, B. Lifespan
extension and rescue of spongiform encephalopathy in superoxide
dismutase 2 nullizygous mice treated with superoxide dismutase-
catalase mimetics. J. Neurosci. 21:8348–8353; 2001.
[38] Hinerfeld,D.;Traini,M. D.;Weinberger, R.P.; Cochran, B.;Doctrow,
S.R.;Harry, J.;Melov, S.Endogenousmitochondrial oxidativestress:
neurodegeneration, proteomic analysis, specific respiratory chain
defects,andefficaciousantioxidanttherapyinsuperoxidedismutase2
null mice. J. Neurochem. 88:657–667; 2004.
[39] Shiva, S.; Crawford, J. H.; Ramachandran, A.; Ceaser, E. K.;
Hillson, T.; Brookes, P. S.; Patel, R. P.; Darley-Usmar, V. M.
Mechanisms of the interaction of nitroxyl with mitochondria.
Biochem. J. 379:359–366; 2004.
[40] Humphries, K. M.; Szweda, L. I. Selective inactivation of alpha-
ketoglutarate dehydrogenase and pyruvate dehydrogenase: reac-
tion of lipoic acid with 4-hydroxy-2-nonenal. Biochemistry 37:
15835–15841; 1998.
[41] Goldberg, M. S.; Fleming, S. M.; Palacino, J. J.; Cepeda, C.; Lam, H.
A.; Bhatnagar, A.; Meloni, E. G.; Wu, N.; Ackerson, L. C.;
Klapstein, G. J.; Gajendiran, M.; Roth, B. L.; Chesselet, M. F.;
Maidment, N. T.; Levine, M. S.; Shen, J. Parkin-deficient mice
exhibit nigrostriatal deficits but not loss of dopaminergic neurons. J.
Biol. Chem. 278:43628–43635; 2003.
[42] Shimura, H.; Hattori, N.; Kubo, S.; Mizuno, Y.; Asakawa, S.;
Minoshima, S.; Shimizu, N.; Iwai, K.; Chiba, T.; Tanaka, K.; Suzuki,
T. Familial Parkinson disease gene product, parkin, is a ubiquitin-
protein ligase. Nat. Genet. 25:302–305; 2000.
[43] Darios, F.; Corti, O.; Lucking, C. B.; Hampe, C.; Muriel, M. P.;
Abbas, N.; Gu, W. J.; Hirsch, E. C.; Rooney, T.; Ruberg, M.; Brice,
A. Parkin prevents mitochondrial swelling and cytochrome c
release in mitochondria-dependent cell death. Hum. Mol. Genet.
12:517–526; 2003.
[44] Palacino, J. J.; Sagi, D.; Goldberg, M. S.; Krauss, S.; Motz, C.;
Wacker, M.; Klose, J.; Shen, J. Mitochondrial dysfunction and
oxidative damage in parkin-deficient mice. J. Biol. Chem.
& Medicine 38 (2005) 175–188
279:18614–18622; 2004.
[45] Santamaria, E.; Avila, M. A.; Latasa, M. U.; Rubio, A.; Martin-Duce,
A.; Lu, S. C.; Mato, J. M.; Corrales, F. J. Functional proteomics of
nonalcoholic steatohepatitis: mitochondrial proteins as targets of S-
adenosylmethionine. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 100:3065–3070;
2003.
[46] Lu, S. C.; Alvarez, L.; Huang, Z. Z.; Chen, L.; An, W.; Corrales, F.
J.; Avila, M. A.; Kanel, G.; Mato, J. M. Methionine adenosyl-
transferase 1A knockout mice are predisposed to liver injury and
exhibit increased expression of genes involved in proliferation. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 98:5560–5565; 2001.
[47] Martinez-Chantar, M. L.; Corrales, F. J.; Martinez-Cruz, L. A.;
Garcia-Trevijano, E. R.; Huang, Z. Z.; Chen, L.; Kanel, G.; Avila, M.
A.; Mato, J. M.; Lu, S. C. Spontaneous oxidative stress and liver
tumors in mice lacking methionine adenosyltransferase 1A. FASEB J.
16:1292–1294; 2002.
[48] Lemasters, J. J.; Qian, T.; He, L.; Kim, J. S.; Elmore, S. P.; Cascio,
W. E.; Brenner, D. A. Role of mitochondrial inner membrane
permeabilization in necrotic cell death, apoptosis, and autophagy.
Antioxid. Redox Signal. 4:769–781; 2002.
[49] Costa, N. J.; Dahm, C. C.; Hurrell, F.; Taylor, E. R.; Murphy, M. P.
Interactions of mitochondrial thiols with nitric oxide. Antioxid.
Redox Signal. 5:291–305; 2003.
[50] Kim, J. R.; Yoon, H. W.; Kwon, K. S.; Lee, S. R.; Rhee, S. G.
Identification of proteins containing cysteine residues that are
sensitive to oxidation by hydrogen peroxide at neutral pH. Anal.
Biochem. 283:214–221; 2000.
[51] Jaffrey, S. R.; Snyder, S. H. The biotin switch method for the
detection of S-nitrosylated proteins. Sci. STKE PL1:2001.
[52] Jaffrey, S. R.; Erdjument-Bromage, H.; Ferris, C. D.; Tempst, P.;
Snyder, S. H. Protein S-nitrosylation: a physiological signal for
neuronal nitric oxide. Nat. Cell Biol. 3:193–197; 2001.
[53] Foster, M. W.; Stamler, J. S. New insights into protein S-nitro-
sylation: mitochondria as a model system. J. Biol. Chem.
279:25891–25897; 2004.
[54] Lin, T. K.; Hughes, G.; Muratovska, A.; Blaikie, F. H.; Brookes, P. S.;
Darley-Usmar, V.; Smith, R. A.; Murphy, M. P. Specific modification
of mitochondrial protein thiols in response to oxidative stress: a
proteomics approach. J. Biol. Chem. 277:17048–17056; 2002.
[55] Venkatraman, A.; Landar, A.; Davis, A. J.; Ulasova, E.; Page, G.;
Murphy, M. P.; Darley-Usmar, V.; Bailey, S. M. Oxidative
modification of hepatic mitochondria protein thiols: effect of chronic
alcohol consumption. Am. J. Physiol. Gastrointest. Liver Physiol.
286:G521–G527; 2004.
[56] Riobo, N. A.; Clementi, E.; Melani, M.; Boveris, A.; Cadenas, E.;
Moncada, S.; Poderoso, J. J. Nitric oxide inhibits mitochondrial
NADH:ubiquinone reductase activity through peroxynitrite forma-
tion. Biochem. J. 359:139–145; 2001.
[57] Poderoso, J. J.; Lisdero, C.; Schopfer, F.; Riobo, N.; Carreras, M.
C.; Cadenas, E.; Boveris, A. The regulation of mitochondrial
oxygen uptake by redox reactions involving nitric oxide and
ubiquinol. J. Biol. Chem. 274:37709–37716; 1999.
[58] Torres, J.; Darley-Usmar, V.; Wilson, M. T. Inhibition of
cytochrome c oxidase in turnover by nitric oxide: mechanism
and implications for control of respiration. Biochem. J. 312(Pt. 1):
169–173; 1995.
[59] Brown, G. C. Nitric oxide inhibition of cytochrome oxidase and
mitochondrial respiration: implications for inflammatory, neuro-
degenerative and ischaemic pathologies. Mol. Cell. Biochem. 174:
189–192; 1997.
[60] Ischiropoulos, H.; Zhu, L.; Beckman, J. S. Peroxynitrite formation
from macrophage-derived nitric oxide. Arch. Biochem. Biophys.
298:446–451; 1992.
[61] Beckman, J. S.; Ischiropoulos, H.; Zhu, L.; van der Woerd, M.;
Smith, C.; Chen, J.; Harrison, J.; Martin, J. C.; Tsai, M. Kinetics of
superoxide dismutase- and iron-catalyzed nitration of phenolics by
peroxynitrite. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 298:438–445; 1992.
S.M. Bailey et al. / Free Radical Biology
[62] Quijano, C.; Hernandez-Saavedra, D.; Castro, L.; McCord, J. M.;
Freeman, B. A.; Radi, R. Reaction of peroxynitrite with Mn-
superoxide dismutase. Role of the metal center in decomposition
kinetics and nitration. J. Biol. Chem. 276:11631–11638; 2001.
[63] Yamakura, F.; Taka, H.; Fujimura, T.; Murayama, K. Inactivation of
human manganese-superoxide dismutase by peroxynitrite is caused
by exclusive nitration of tyrosine 34 to 3-nitrotyrosine. J. Biol.
Chem. 273:14085–14089; 1998.
[64] MacMillan-Crow, L. A.; Crow, J. P.; Kerby, J. D.; Beckman, J. S.;
Thompson, J. A. Nitration and inactivation of manganese superoxide
dismutase in chronic rejection of human renal allografts. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 93:11853–11858; 1996.
[65] Knight-Lozano, C. A.; Young, C. G.; Burow, D. L.; Hu, Z. Y.;
Uyeminami, D.; Pinkerton, K. E.; Ischiropoulos, H.; Ballinger, S. W.
Cigarette smoke exposure and hypercholesterolemia increase
mitochondrial damage in cardiovascular tissues. Circulation 105:
849–854; 2002.
[66] Cassina, A.; Radi, R. Differential inhibitory action of nitric oxide and
peroxynitrite on mitochondrial electron transport. Arch. Biochem.
Biophys. 328:309–316; 1996.
[67] Radi, R.; Rodriguez, M.; Castro, L.; Telleri, R. Inhibition of
mitochondrial electron transport by peroxynitrite. Arch. Biochem.
Biophys. 308:89–95; 1994.
[68] Hortelano, S.; Alvarez, A. M.; Bosca, L. Nitric oxide induces
tyrosine nitration and release of cytochrome c preceding an increase
of mitochondrial transmembrane potential in macrophages. FASEB J.
13:2311–2317; 1999.
[69] Thomson, L.; Trujillo, M.; Telleri, R.; Radi, R. Kinetics of
cytochrome c 2+ oxidation by peroxynitrite: implications for
superoxide measurements in nitric oxide-producing biological
systems. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 319:491–497; 1995.
[70] Cassina, A. M.; Hodara, R.; Souza, J. M.; Thomson, L.; Castro, L.;
Ischiropoulos, H.; Freeman, B. A.; Radi, R. Cytochrome c nitration
by peroxynitrite. J. Biol. Chem. 275:21409–21415; 2000.
[71] Borutaite, V.; Morkuniene, R.; Brown, G. C. Release of cytochrome
c from heart mitochondria is induced by high Ca
2+
and peroxynitrite
and is responsible for Ca
2+
-induced inhibition of substrate oxidation.
Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1453:41–48; 1999.
[72] Castro, L.; Eiserich, J. P.; Sweeney, S.; Radi, R.; Freeman, B. A.
Cytochrome c: a catalyst and target of nitrite-hydrogen peroxide-
dependent protein nitration. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 421:99–107;
2004.
[73] Aulak, K. S.; Miyagi, M.; Yan, L.; West, K. A.; Massillon, D.;
Crabb, J. W.; Stuehr, D. J. Proteomic method identifies proteins
nitrated in vivo during inflammatory challenge. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA 98:12056–12061; 2001.
[74] Turko, I. V.; Li, L.; Aulak, K. S.; Stuehr, D. J.; Chang, J. Y.; Murad,
F. Protein tyrosine nitration in the mitochondria from diabetic mouse
heart. Implications to dysfunctional mitochondria in diabetes. J. Biol.
Chem. 278:33972–33977; 2003.
[75] Brookes, P. S.; Bolanos, J. P.; Heales, S. J. The assumption that nitric
oxide inhibits mitochondrial ATP synthesis is correct. FEBS Lett.
446:261–263; 1999.
[76] Koeck, T.; Fu, X.; Hazen, S. L.; Crabb, J. W.; Stuehr, D. J.; Aulak, K.
S. Rapid and selective oxygen-regulated protein tyrosine denitration
and nitration in mitochondria. J. Biol. Chem. 279:27257–27262;
2004.
[77] Aulak, K. S.; Koeck, T.; Crabb, J. W.; Stuehr, D. J. Dynamics of
protein nitration in cells and mitochondria. Am. J. Physiol. Heart
Circ. Physiol. 286:H30–H38; 2004.
[78] Murray, J.; Taylor, S. W.; Zhang, B.; Ghosh, S. S.; Capaldi, R. A.
Oxidative damage to mitochondrial complex I due to peroxynitrite:
identification of reactive tyrosines by mass spectrometry. J. Biol.
Chem. 278:37223–37230; 2003.
[79] Taylor, S. W.; Fahy, E.; Murray, J.; Capaldi, R. A.; Ghosh, S. S.
Oxidative post-translational modification of tryptophan residues in
cardiac mitochondrial proteins. J. Biol. Chem. 278:19587–19590;
& Medicine 38 (2005) 175–188 187
2003.
[80] Uchida, K.; Szweda, L. I.; Chae, H. Z.; Stadtman, E. R. Immuno-
chemical detection of 4-hydroxynonenal protein adducts in oxidized
hepatocytes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 90:8742–8746; 1993.
[81] Tuma, D. J. Role of malondialdehyde–acetaldehyde adducts in liver
injury. Free Radic. Biol. Med. 32:303–308; 2002.
[82] Hartley, D. P.; Kroll, D. J.; Petersen, D. R. Prooxidant-initiated
lipid peroxidation in isolated rat hepatocytes: detection of 4-
hydroxynonenal- and malondialdehyde–protein adducts. Chem.
Res. Toxicol. 10:895–905; 1997.
[83] Esterbauer, H.; Schaur, R. J.; Zollner, H. Chemistry and biochemistry
of 4-hydroxynonenal, malonaldehyde and related aldehydes. Free
Radic. Biol. Med. 11:81–128; 1991.
[84] Ceaser, E. K.; Moellering, D. R.; Shiva, S.; Ramachandran, A.;
Landar, A.; Venkartraman, A.; Crawford, J.; Patel, R.; Dickinson, D.
A.; Ulasova, E.; Ji, S.; Darley-Usmar, V. M. Mechanisms of signal
transduction mediated by oxidized lipids: the role of the electrophile-
responsive proteome. Biochem. Soc. Trans. 32:151–155; 2004.
[85] Shibata, T.; Yamada, T.; Ishii, T.; Kumazawa, S.; Nakamura, H.;
Masutani, H.; Yodoi, J.; Uchida, K. Thioredoxin as a molecular target
[93] Chen, J. J.; Robinson, N. C.; Schenker, S.; Frosto, T. A.; Henderson,
G. I. Formation of 4-hydroxynonenal adducts with cytochrome c
oxidase in rats following short-term ethanol intake. Hepatology
29:1792–1798; 1999.
[94] Chen, J.; Henderson, G. I.; Freeman, G. L. Role of 4-hydroxyno-
nenal in modification of cytochrome c oxidase in ischemia/
reperfused rat heart. J. Mol. Cell. Cardiol. 33:1919–1927; 2001.
[95] Choksi, K. B.; Boylston, W. H.; Rabek, J. P.; Widger, W. R.;
Papaconstantinou, J. Oxidatively damaged proteins of heart
mitochondrial electron transport complexes. Biochim. Biophys. Acta
1688:95–101; 2004.
[96] Benderdour, M.; Charron, G.; DeBlois, D.; Comte, B.; Des
Rosiers, C. Cardiac mitochondrial NADP
+
-isocitrate dehydrogen-
ase is inactivated through 4-hydroxynonenal adduct formation: an
event that precedes hypertrophy development. J. Biol. Chem. 278:
45154–45159; 2003.
[97] Stadtman, E. R. Metal ion-catalyzed oxidation of proteins:
biochemical mechanism and biological consequences. Free Radic.
Biol. Med. 9:315–325; 1990.
S.M. Bailey et al. / Free Radical Biology & Medicine 38 (2005) 175–188188
2003.
[86] Uchida, K. 4-Hydroxy-2-nonenal: a product and mediator of
oxidative stress. Prog. Lipid Res. 42:318–343; 2003.
[87] Levine, R. L.; Garland, D.; Oliver, C. N.; Amici, A.; Climent, I.;
Lenz, A. G.; Ahn, B. W.; Shaltiel, S.; Stadtman, E. R. Determination
of carbonyl content in oxidatively modified proteins. Methods
Enzymol. 186:464–478; 1990.
[88] Cohn, J. A.; Tsai, L.; Friguet, B.; Szweda, L. I. Chemical
characterization of a protein-4-hydroxy-2-nonenal cross-link:
immunochemical detection in mitochondria exposed to oxidative
stress. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 328:158–164; 1996.
[89] Sadek, H. A.; Humphries, K. M.; Szweda, P. A.; Szweda, L. I.
Selective inactivation of redox-sensitive mitochondrial enzymes
during cardiac reperfusion. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 406:222–228;
2002.
[90] Nulton-Persson, A. C.; Starke, D. W.; Mieyal, J. J.; Szweda, L. I.
Reversible inactivation of alpha-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase in
response to alterations in the mitochondrial glutathione status.
Biochemistry 42:4235–4242; 2003.
[91] Moreau, R.; Heath, S. H.; Doneanu, C. E.; Lindsay, J. G.; Hagen, T.
M. Age-related increase in 4-hydroxynonenal adduction to rat heart
alpha-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase does not cause loss of its catalytic
activity. Antioxid. Redox Signal. 5:517–527; 2003.
[92] Chen, J. J.; Petersen, D. R.; Schenker, S.; Henderson, G. I. Formation
of malondialdehyde adducts in livers of rats exposed to ethanol: role
in ethanol-mediated inhibition of cytochrome c oxidase. Alcohol.
Clin. Exp. Res. 24:544–552; 2000.
[98] Stadtman, E. R.; Berlett, B. S. Reactive oxygen-mediated protein
oxidation in aging and disease. Drug Metab. Rev. 30:225–243; 1998.
[99] Berlett, B. S.; Stadtman, E. R. Protein oxidation in aging, disease,
and oxidative stress. J. Biol. Chem. 272:20313–20316; 1997.
[100] Levine, R. L.; Williams, J. A.; Stadtman, E. R.; Shacter, E. Carbonyl
assays for determination of oxidatively modified proteins. Methods
Enzymol. 233:346–357; 1994.
[101] Wondrak, G. T.; Cervantes-Laurean, D.; Jacobson, E. L.; Jacobson,
M. K. Histone carbonylation in vivo and in vitro. Biochem. J.
351(Pt.3):769–777; 2000.
[102] Dalle-Donne, I.; Rossi, R.; Giustarini, D.; Gagliano, N.; Lusini, L.;
Milzani, A.; Di Simplicio, P.; Colombo, R. Actin carbonylation:
from a simple marker of protein oxidation to relevant signs of severe
functional impairment. Free Radic. Biol. Med. 31:1075–1083;
2001.
[103] Yoo, B. S.; Regnier, F. E. Proteomic analysis of carbonylated
proteins in two-dimensional gel electrophoresis using avidin–
fluorescein affinity staining. Electrophoresis 25:1334–1341;
2004.
[104] Reinheckel, T.; Korn, S.; Mohring, S.; Augustin, W.; Halangk, W.;
Schild, L. Adaptation of protein carbonyl detection to the
requirements of proteome analysis demonstrated for nhypoxia/
reoxygenation in isolated rat liver mitochondria. Arch. Biochem.
Biophys. 376:59–65; 2000.
[105] Conrad, C. C.; Choi, J.; Malakowsky, C. A.; Talent, J. M.; Dai, R.;
Marshall, P.; Gracy, R. W. Identification of protein carbonyls after
two-dimensional electrophoresis. Proteomics 1:829–834; 2001.
of cyclopentenone prostaglandins. J. Biol. Chem. 278:26046–26054;
