Review
70 www.thelancet.com   Vol 368   July 1, 2006
Mitochondria are ubiquitous in eukaryotes and are 
essential for survival. Their primary function is to support 
aerobic respiration and to provide energy substrates 
(such as ATP) for intracellular metabolic pathways. 
Mitochondria have also been shown to play an important 
role in cell signalling, particularly in signalling for 
apoptotic cell death. Mitochondria host several metabolic 
pathways, including the Krebs cycle, β-oxidation, and 
lipid and cholesterol synthesis. Given its fundamental 
role in the human body, defects of mitochondrial function 
can have disastrous consequences. The potential for 
mitochondrial dysfunction is increased by the presence 
of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) that, in humans, is 
responsible for the encoding of proteins critical for 
oxidative phosphorylation. Thus, human mitochondrial 
diseases encompass mutations of mtDNA and nuclear 
DNA, as well as toxin-induced defects. The 5 years since 
the last reviews in The Lancet on mitochondria
1,2
 have 
seen major advances in our understanding of 
mitochondrial diseases, and in particular, the involvement 
of nuclear mutations in genes encoding mitochondrial 
proteins. This review aims to provide an update on the 
involvement of mitochondria in human disease. Not all 
mitochondrial clinical phenotypes will be discussed in 
detail, since these have been reviewed elsewhere.
3–5
Mitochondrial biology
Structure
Mitochondria are intracellular double membrane-bound 
structures. Although traditionally considered as small 
isolated organelles within the cell, it is more likely that 
mitochondria form a complex branching network. The 
density of mitochondria varies from one tissue to another, 
and is related to that tissue’s dependence upon oxidative 
phosphorylation for energy provision. Thus, neurones, 
and cardiac and skeletal muscle cells have a high density 
of mitochondria, which to some extent explains their 
sensitivity to energy-dependent defects resulting from 
mitochondrial abnormalities. Mitochondria contain their 
own DNA, which is thought to be a remnant from the 
time that they were free-living organisms before forming 
a symbiotic relationship with eukaryotes. Human 
mtDNA is a circular double stranded molecule about 
16·6 Kb long. It is much smaller than most nuclear 
genes. MtDNA codes for 22 transfer and two ribosomal 
RNAs, and for 13 proteins. Human mtDNA is extremely 
compact and contains virtually no intronic (non-coding) 
regions. Although human mtDNA encodes the basic 
machinery for protein synthesis, it remains entirely 
dependent upon the nucleus for the provision of enzymes 
for replication, repair, transcription and translation. This 
dependency lies at the heart of several newly recognised 
human diseases that are characterised by secondary 
abnormalities of mtDNA. 
MtDNA replication and function
MtDNA is continuously replicating, and the timing of 
replication seems to proceed independently of that of the 
nucleus, and occurs in dividing as well as non-dividing 
cells.
6
 MtDNA polymerase γ (POLG), thymidine kinase 2, 
and deoxyguanosine kinase are nuclear encoded enzymes 
responsible for replication. MtDNA is transcribed 
polycistronically and translated on mitochondrial 
ribosomes. MtDNA transcription is necessary for the 
initiation of replication. A novel D-loop replication origin 
(at position 57) has been identiﬁ ed and is thought to 
represent the major site of mtDNA replication under 
steady-state conditions.
7
 There are important but subtle 
diﬀ erences in the translation code that are speciﬁ c for 
mtDNA and prevent the translation of nuclear DNA 
within mitochondria, and vice versa. 
MtDNA is highly polymorphic, with several diﬀ erences 
in sequence between individuals from the same ethnic 
group and more between those in diﬀ erent groups. 
Lancet 2006; 368: 70–82
University Department of 
Clinical Neurosciences, Royal 
Free and University College 
Medical School, and Institute 
of Neurology, University 
College London, London 
NW3 2PF, UK 
(Prof A H V Schapira FMedSci) 
Prof Anthony H V Schapira
a.schapira@medasch.ucl.ac.uk 
Mitochondrial disease
Anthony H V Schapira
Defects of mitochondrial metabolism cause a wide range of human diseases that include examples from all medical 
subspecialties. This review updates the topic of mitochondrial diseases by reviewing the most important recent 
advances in this area. The factors inﬂ uencing inheritance, maintenance and replication of mtDNA are reviewed and 
the genotype-phenotype of mtDNA disorders has been expanded, with new insights into epidemiology, pathogenesis 
and its role in ageing. Recently identiﬁ ed nuclear gene mutations of mitochondrial proteins include mutations of 
frataxin causing Friedreich’s ataxia, PINK1, DJ1 causing Parkinson’s disease and POLG causing infantile mtDNA 
depletion syndrome, ophthalmoplegia, parkinsonism, male subfertility and, in a transgenic mouse model, premature 
senescence. Mitochondrial defects in neurodegenerative diseases include Parkinson’s, Alzheimer’s and Huntington’s 
disease. Improved understanding of mtDNA inheritance and mutation penetrance patterns, and novel techniques for 
mtDNA modiﬁ cation oﬀ er signiﬁ cant prospects for more accurate genetic counselling and eﬀ ective future therapies.
Search strategy and selection criteria
References for this review were identiﬁ ed by searches of 
PubMed and MEDLINE using the search terms “mitochondrial 
DNA”, “polymerase gamma” between 2000 and 2005. 
References were also identiﬁ ed from relevant articles and 
through searches of the author’s ﬁ les. Only papers reviewed 
in English were selected.
Review
www.thelancet.com   Vol 368   July 1, 2006 71
MtDNA haplotypes are based upon speciﬁ c patterns of 
polymorphisms and seem to inﬂ uence the ageing process, 
susceptibility to some diseases, and the expression of 
some mtDNA mutations.
8,9
 MtDNA haplotypes have been 
used to track population movements across the globe and 
serve to provide a means to evaluate ethnic descent. There 
is evidence of intra-molecular recombination in 
mtDNA,
10,11
 but only recently has evidence been obtained 
for intermolecular recombination.
12
 All 13 proteins 
encoded by human mtDNA are subunits of the respiratory 
chain and oxidative phosphorylation system (OXPHOS) 
(ﬁ gure 1 and ﬁ gure 2). These proteins are essential for 
normal OXPHOS. Eradication of mtDNA from cells to 
produce ρ
0
 cells results in the loss of OXPHOS and the 
provision of ATP by glycolysis alone. Furthermore, 
transfer of mtDNA to ρ
0
 cells with another nuclear 
background results in OXPHOS activity that correlates 
with the donor activities.
13
 Thus, the mtDNA-encoded 
subunits are not only essential for OXPHOS, but they 
also, at least in this model, inﬂ uence the level of enzyme 
activity. The ﬁ ve OXPHOS complexes are located on the 
inner mitochondrial membrane, and comprise about 85 
subunits. Substrates supply reducing equivalents to 
complexes I and II and electrons pass down the respiratory 
chain via ubiquinone and cytochrome c to complexes III 
and IV. An electrochemical gradient is established by the 
pumping of protons out of the mitochondrial inner 
membrane and this is used by complex V to synthesise 
ATP (ﬁ gure 2). 
MtDNA inheritance
MtDNA is inherited through the maternal line. Most 
researchers believed that no paternal mtDNA from sperm 
enters the fertilised ovum at the point of conception, the 
embryo thus developing with maternal mtDNA alone. 
However, one report of the paternal inheritance of a 
microdeletion mutation in a mtDNA complex I gene 
indicated that there may be rare exceptions to this.
14
 
Analysis of infants born after intracytoplasmic sperm 
injection failed to identify paternal mtDNA with methods 
capable of detecting levels as low as 0·001%.
15–17
 This 
implied that paternal mtDNA replication was either 
suppressed, or diluted beyond the limits of detection, to 
levels at which its contribution would in any event be 
irrelevant. Indeed, there is some evidence for selective 
targeting of sperm mitochondria for degradation by the 
ovum.
18,19
 Failure of an ovum to eliminate paternal mtDNA 
could result in loss of the embryo at the blastocyst stage.
20
 
Investigators have also failed to detect paternal mtDNA in 
patients with sporadic mitochondrial myopathies.
21,22
 
Thus, if paternal transmission does occur, it is rare and 
might depend on the presence of particular paternal 
mutations that allow the sperm’s mtDNA to escape 
destruction as well as to permit replication. In any event, 
the dogma that human mtDNA is exclusively maternally 
inherited remains a reasonable basis for genetic 
counselling. 
Homoplasmy and heteroplasmy 
There are thousands of mtDNA molecules per cell, and 
millions per individual. For the most part, their sequence 
will be identical (homoplasmy). However, somatic 
mtDNA mutations arise and accumulate with ageing, 
and could have a role in the senescence of tissues. The 
most common source of somatic mutation of mtDNA is 
the free radicals generated by the respiratory chain itself. 
Mitochondrial diseases are characterised by the 
coexistence of wild type and mutant mtDNA in various 
proportions (heteroplasmy). The notion that the 
percentage of mutant form determines or contributes to 
disease expression is an important concept in 
mitochondrial disease. 
Complex I NADH dehydrogenase genes
Complex III ubiquinol: cytochrome C oxidoreductase genes
Complex IV cytochrome C oxidase genes
Complex V ATP synthase genes
Complex I II III IV V
Figure 1: Mitochondrial respiratory chain and oxidative phosphorylation system
Each hexagon represents a polypeptide product of a single gene.
H
+
H
+
Q
Q
Q
QQ
Q
Q
ETF
C
C
C
C
NAD
NADH
FADH
2
FADH
2
FAD
FAD
Glucose
Matrix
TCA
cycle
e
–
B ——— Oxidation —————— fatty acids 
O
2
H
2
O
ADP+PI ATP
H
+
H
+
H
+
Complex I
NADH CoQ
reducatase
Succinate CoQ
reductase
Ubiquitonol
cytochrome c
reductase
Cytochrome
oxidase
ATP
synthase
II III IV V
2
1
Figure 2: The functional features of mitochondrial respiratory chain and oxidative phosphorylation system
NADH=the reduced form of nicotinamide-adenine dinucleotide; CoQ=ubiquinone; ATP=adenosine triphosphate; 
NAD=nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide; TCA=tricarboxylic acid cycle; FADH
2
=the reduced form of ﬂ avin adenine 
dinucleotide; FAD=ﬂ avin adenine dinucleotide; ETF=electron transfer ﬂ avoprotein; e
–
=electron; ADP=adenosine 
diphosphate; Pi=inorganic phosphate.
Review
72 www.thelancet.com   Vol 368   July 1, 2006
Mitochondria are randomly segregated at cell division 
including oogenesis. It is during oogenesis that wild-type 
and mutant mtDNA molecules are randomly partitioned 
to oocytes creating a spectrum of heteroplasmy across 
the oocyte population. This random segregation occurs 
through tight “bottlenecks”: of the 150 000 mtDNA 
molecules estimated to be present in human oocytes, 
only a small proportion of this mtDNA population is 
transmitted both during oogenesis and subsequently to 
the embryo. This has important implications for 
transmission of mutant mtDNA, as well as the tissue 
speciﬁ c basis of disease expression. A high proportion of 
mutant load in the oocyte population could result in a 
high proportion of aﬀ ected oﬀ spring—ie, a high 
transmission rate.
23
 
Mitochondrial transport
Mitochondria have evolved a complex system to import 
nuclear-encoded proteins. Proteins might contain an 
N-terminal aminoacid sequence that targets them to outer 
mitochondrial membrane receptors, which unfold and 
import the protein before excision of the targeting 
sequence and chaperoning to the appropriate mito-
chondrial compartment. Identiﬁ cation of a targeting 
sequence is an important indicator of mitochondrial 
localisation, and has been useful in determining the 
distribution and function of proteins. Diseases caused by 
defects of the mitochondrial import system are rare, but 
mutations of a gene involved in mitochondrial import has 
been shown to be the cause of the Mohr-Tranebjaerg 
syndrome (sensorineural deafness, dystonia, dysphagia, 
cortical blindness, and paranoia).
24,25
 
MtDNA mutations
Investigating the epidemiology of mtDNA genetics is 
complicated by the wide spectrum of clinical presentation, 
the diverse range of mutations and the high carrier rate, 
all of which will lead to underestimates of prevalence. A 
population-based study of the A3243G mutation in 
northern Finland estimated prevalence at 16·3 per 
100 000.
26
 The mutation was found in 14% of patients 
with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, 13% of patients with 
ophthalmoplegia, 7·4% of maternally inherited deafness, 
and 6·9% of those with occipital stroke. These ﬁ gures 
emphasise the multisystem nature of mitochondrial 
disease and in particular their relevance to all medical 
specialties. In Newcastle, UK, mitochondrial diseases or 
the risk of their development was estimated to have a 
prevalence of 12·48 per 100 000.
27
 This study was based 
on the assessment of patients and relatives referred over 
15 years with mtDNA mutations, and either had 
mitochondrial disease or were carriers. Two studies 
estimated the prevalence of respiratory chain diseases in 
children as 4·7 per 100 000 (8·9 per 100 000 in pre-school 
children)
28
 or 5·0 per 100 000
29
—including mutations in 
nuclear-encoded genes as well as in mtDNA genes.
MtDNA deletions
MtDNA deletions were the ﬁ rst mutations to be 
described and associated with human disease.
30
 The size 
of the deletion can vary from a single base to several 
kilobases and be located on any part of the molecule. 
The most common deletion is 5 Kb long, and spans the 
region between the genes for cytochrome b and 
cytochrome oxidase subunit II, thus encompassing 
tRNAs and protein-coding genes. Large-scale 
macrodeletions such as this have typically been 
associated with particular phenotypes including chronic 
progressive external ophthalmoplegia (CPEO), Kearns-
Sayre syndrome, and Pearson’s marrow-pancreas 
syndrome. However, the pathological expression of 
deletions is not restricted to these phenotypes and they 
have been described in association with virtually all 
mitochondrial encephalomyopathy syndromes. 
The prevalence of single deletion disorders is estimated 
at 1·2 per 100 000. MtDNA deletions can occur as a single 
type or population, or as multiple deletions of diﬀ erent 
length. Deletions exist in heteroplasmic form, the 
proportion of deleted molecules varies between tissues, 
and the degree of heteroplasmy can shift over time. 
Single deletions arise as a primary mtDNA mutation, 
probably within the oocyte, and are transmitted to 
oﬀ spring who might then develop clinical features. It is 
highly uncommon for more than one of the oﬀ spring to 
be aﬀ ected, and the risk of subsequent transmission 
from an aﬀ ected woman has been estimated at 4%.
31
 
Some patients have duplications of mtDNA, which 
although might not be pathogenic themselves, could be 
an intermediate step in the generation of deletions. Small 
microdeletions have been described in mtDNA genes, 
mtDNA mutation
CPEO 3243 tRNALeu(UUR)
Cardiomyopathy with or without encephalopathy 4269 tRNAIle
4317I tRNAle
3260 tRNALeu(UUR)
3243 tRNALeu(UUR)
KSS Deletion/duplication, 3243 tRNALeu(UUR)
8344 tRNALys 
MELAS 3243 tRNALeu(UUR)
11084 ND4
3271 tRNALeu(UUR)
MERRF 8344 tRNALys
8356 tRNALys
NARP 8993 ATPase 6
Pearson’s syndrome
LHON ND4 (11778)
ND1 (3460)
ND6 (14484)
Leigh’s syndrome 8344 tRNALys
8993 ATPase 6
Diabetes mellitus and deafness 3243 tRNALeu(UUR)
Table: MtDNA mutations and associated diseases
Review
www.thelancet.com   Vol 368   July 1, 2006 73
including those for cytochrome oxidase, cytochrome b 
and complex I, that are associated with a variety of clinical 
presentations.
MtDNA point mutations
Over 100 point mutations associated with human disease 
have been described in protein coding genes, tRNAs, and 
rRNAs.
32 
Their clinical expression is wide (table), and 
includes phenotypes such as MELAS (myopathy 
encephalopathy lactic acidosis and stroke-like episodes), 
MERRF (myoclonic epilepsy and ragged red ﬁ bres), NARP 
(neuropathy ataxia and retinitis pigmentosa), MILS 
(maternally inherited Leigh syndrome), and LHON (Leber 
hereditary optic neuropathy). In addition, oligosymp tom-
atic syndromes arising from mtDNA point mutations can 
include diabetes mellitus, cardiomyopathy, sensorineural 
deafness, cardiomyopathy, and myoglobinuria. However, 
patients with the oligosymptomatic forms can also sub-
sequently develop additional features. Rare and intriguing 
associations have been reported between mtDNA point 
mutations and Parkinson’s disease, motor neurone disease 
(amyotrophic lateral sclerosis), palmoplantar keratoderma, 
multiple lipomas, and neuroﬁ bromatosis. Maternal 
inheritance of hypertension, hypercholesterolaemia, and 
hypomagnesaemia caused by a mtDNA mutation in the 
tRNA for isoleucine has been described.
33
 
Pathogenesis of mtDNA mutations
The criteria for deﬁ ning pathogenic mtDNA mutations 
have required revision as our understanding of 
mitochondrial biology and pathology has expanded. To a 
large degree, the complexity of this issue arises from the 
highly polymorphic nature of mtDNA. Traditionally, 
mutations have been deﬁ ned as being absent in control 
populations, resulting in the substitution of a conserved 
aminoacid, segregating with the disease phenotype and 
with a relevant biochemical defect, and usually being 
heteroplasmic. However, there are several observations 
that have undermined these guidelines. Many individuals 
with LHON have homoplasmic mutations, and unaﬀ ected 
family members can have the same homoplasmic mtDNA 
mutation. A pathogenic tRNA mutation causing an 
encephalomyopathic phenotype present in heteroplasmic 
form in some aﬀ ected members of a family, was also 
found in homoplasmic form in an asymptomatic 32-year-
old family member.
34
 Increasingly, researchers accept that 
mtDNA sequence changes can interact with each other, 
with nuclear genes, or with the environment to cause 
disease. Evidence also suggests that the nuclear 
background of a mtDNA mutation can aﬀ ect its 
biochemical expression.
35
The link between genotype and phenotype in 
mitochondrial diseases has always been recognised as 
complex. For instance, mtDNA deletions are not only 
associated with CPEO, Kearns-Sayre syndrome, and 
Pearson’s syndrome, but have also been described in 
patients with MELAS, isolated diabetes, or cardiomyopathy. 
Similarly, the A3243G mutation is probably the commonest 
cause of MELAS, but has also been found in patients with 
CPEO, Kearns-Sayre syndrome, isolated diabetes, etc. 
Thus, the same mutation can result in multiple phenotypes, 
and the same phenotype can be caused by several diﬀ erent 
mutations, and this can apply to mutations in protein 
coding genes—eg, MTND5, just as much as tRNA genes. 
Furthermore, there is no helpful link between the site of 
an mtDNA mutation—ie, tRNA, rRNA, protein coding 
gene, and the resulting clinical phenotype. Multiple 
independent factors can inﬂ uence the clinical expression 
of a mutation, including tissue distribution, levels of 
heteroplasmy, nuclear background, and the varying 
dependence of organs on OXPHOS for energy. Inevitably, 
these account for only some of the variation seen, and 
much remains to be discovered on the molecular 
pathogenesis of these mutations.
Leber hereditary optic neuropathy (LHON)
LHON is considered the most common disease caused 
by mtDNA mutations, with a prevalence of 11·82 per 
100 000 population.
36
 LHON is characterised clinically by 
bilateral sequential acute or sub-acute visual failure 
caused by degeneration of the retinal ganglion cells and 
their axons. Three mtDNA mutations G11778A, G3460A, 
and T14484C located in the MTND4, MTND1, and 
MTND6 genes, respectively, account for about 95% of 
cases. The G11778A mutation is the most common, being 
present in 56% of cases, the G3460A in  31%, and the 
T14484C in 6·3%.
36
 The disease occurs predominantly in 
young men, with usually little or no visual recovery, 
although the T14484C mutation is generally associated 
with a better prognosis. A range of secondary or 
intermediate polymorphisms can modify expression.
9
 
Additional mutations in MTND1 and MTND6 have been 
described,
37,38 
with the C4171A mutation in MTND1 being 
associated with signiﬁ cant visual recovery. All these 
mutations are usually present in homoplasmic or high 
mutant heteroplasmic proportions. 
A mouse model of LHON with retinal degeneration 
was developed by expressing ribozymes in the eye that 
speciﬁ cally cleaved the mRNA of a nuclear encoded 
complex I subunit (NDUFA1).
39
 Suppressing the 
expression in the retina of mitochondrial Mn-superoxide 
dismutase (Mn-SOD), a free-radical scavenging enzyme, 
produced similar consequences.
40
 Overexpression of 
Mn-SOD in the presence of inhibition of NDUFA1 
expression ameliorated the deleterious eﬀ ects of the 
latter.
41
 These results imply that the complex I defect 
mediated damage through excess free-radical production. 
Additional insight into LHON pathogenesis was provided 
by the ﬁ nding that the three primary causative mutations 
reduced expression of the glutamate transporter in cell 
culture and this eﬀ ect correlated with complex I activity.
42
 
Mitochondrial free radical production inactivates the 
glutamate transporter and increases glutamate levels, 
indicating that oxidative stress is an important event in 
Review
74 www.thelancet.com   Vol 368   July 1, 2006
LHON pathogenesis. The corollary of these observations 
is that eﬀ ective antioxidant treatment early in the course 
of LHON might improve its prognosis.
Nuclear gene mutations
Although 72 of the 85 subunits of the OXPHOS system 
are encoded by nuclear DNA, translated on cytoribosomes 
and transported to the mitochondrion, mutations of these 
genes have only rarely been described. To some extent, 
this could be an indication of the deleterious nature of 
such mutations, with aﬀ ected fetuses perhaps being 
aborted early in development. Mutations that have been 
described generally manifest in the neonatal period or 
early infancy, although occasional late-onset patients have 
been identiﬁ ed. Mutations in complex I subunits (NDUFS 
1,2,4,7, and 8; and NDUFV1) cause Leigh syndrome and 
leukodystrophy, and those of complex II subunits (I-IV) 
cause Leigh syndrome, ataxia, paraganglioma, and 
phaeochromocytoma. The association with paragangliomas 
and phaeochromocytomas is rare. The late onset cases 
have included progressive ataxia.
Several diseases have now been shown to be due to 
mutations in nuclear genes encoding mitochondrial 
proteins. These include disorders caused by mutations of 
proteins involved in the Krebs citric acid cycle, β-oxidation, 
and the urea cycle. Mutations of nuclear genes involved 
in the replication or maintenance of mtDNA or respiratory 
chain proteins can result in phenotypes identical to those 
associated with primary mtDNA mutations. Others cause 
distinct clinical presentations that might include 
progressive neurodegenerative diseases.
Mutations aﬀ ecting MtDNA maintenance and replication
MtDNA remains dependent upon nuclear DNA for the 
production of a range of proteins involved in its replication, 
transcription, translation, repair, and maintenance. 
Mutations of these genes can induce multiple mtDNA 
deletions or depletion of mtDNA. 
Adenine nucleotide translocator mutations
Adenine nucleotide translocator-1 (ANT-1) is an isoform 
speciﬁ c to muscle, heart, and brain, and regulates the 
adenine nucleotide pool within mitochondria. ANT1 
mutations cause adult onset autosomal dominant CPEO 
with ragged red ﬁ bres and multiple mtDNA deletions in 
skeletal muscle.
43
Twinkle mutations
Twinkle is a hexomeric 5’-3’ DNA helicase protein 
encoded by the C10orf2 gene, which is responsible for 
unwinding the mtDNA replication fork.
44,45
 Inhibition of 
twinkle in cell culture cells results in rapid mtDNA 
depletion, whereas over-expression of the gene leads to 
mtDNA accumulation, conﬁ rming its importance in 
regulating copy number.
46
 Twinkle is highly expressed in 
human skeletal muscle and in a speciﬁ c splice variant in 
testes, which is of interest since mtDNA replication is 
downregulated during spermatogenesis. Twinkle 
co-localises with mitochondrial transcription factor A 
and mitochondrial single-stranded DNA-binding protein, 
and together they are thought to stabilise mtDNA. Several 
mutations causing autosomal dominant progressive 
external ophthalmoplegia (PEO) are located at or near 
putative subunit interaction sites in the holoenzyme.
The clinical manifestations of C10orf2 (twinkle) 
mutations typically include PEO. In some cases, this can 
be of late onset (>50 years of age) and be associated with 
myopathy and cardiomyopathy in addition to axonal 
neuropathy, diabetes, deafness, and osteoporosis.
47 
Muscle biopsy shows changes of a mitochondrial 
myopathy with ragged red ﬁ bres. One patient with a 
twinkle mutation and the SANDO (sensory ataxia, 
neuropathy, dysarthria, and ophthalmoplegia) phenotype 
has been reported.
48
MtDNA polymerase γ mutations
MtDNA polymerase γ (POLG) is a heterodimer 
comprising a 140kDa alpha subunit and a 41kDa beta 
subunit. It is located within the inner mitochondrial 
membrane and is essential for mtDNA replication. The 
alpha subunit is catalytic and contains both polymerase 
and exonuclease activities, the beta subunit facilitates 
DNA binding and promotes DNA synthesis.
49
 Mutations 
of POLG have been associated with a range of clinical 
phenotypes including PEO (panel). 
The human POLG gene contains a 10-CAG repeat 
length encoding a polyglutamine tract. A variation in this 
microsatellite—ie, section that has fewer or more than 
ten repeats has been associated with male subfertility.
50
 
This observation was conﬁ rmed in another study from 
Denmark, in which researchers found that the variation 
of one or both normal alleles was present at greater 
frequency in subfertile males compared to controls.
51
 
There was a positive association between the 
polymorphism and sperm concentration but not sperm 
motility or morphology. However, a study of Italian men 
failed to ﬁ nd any association between the POLG 
polymorphism and subfertility.
52
 
POLG mutations have also been identiﬁ ed as a cause 
of Alpers syndrome, an autosomal recessive disorder 
characterised by epilepsy, cortical blindness, micro-
nodular hepatic cirrhosis, and episodic psychomotor 
Panel: Conditions associated with POLG mutations
Autosomal dominant PEO, with or without parkinsonism
Autosomal recessive PEO, with or without parkinsonism
Alpers syndrome
SANDO—sensory ataxia, neuropathy, dysarthria, 
ophthalmoplegia
Male subfertility
Premature menopause
Cataracts
Review
www.thelancet.com   Vol 368   July 1, 2006 75
regression.
53,54
 Onset is usually within the ﬁ rst few weeks 
or years of life, although early adult onset cases have also 
been described.
55,56
 A homozygous stop mutation 
(G2899T) upstream of the polymerase domain was 
identiﬁ ed in aﬀ ected children from unrelated families.
53
 
They were apparently normal until the ages of 11–19 
months, after which they developed progressive 
encephalopathy. The children and their mothers also 
carried heterozygous mutations (G1681A) in the linker 
region of the polymerase protein that have been 
identiﬁ ed in patients with autosomal recessive PEO or 
SANDO.
57,58 
The relevance of this co-existing hetero-
zygous mutation is not known. POLG activity was less 
than 5% of normal in liver and muscle, and mtDNA 
levels were 25–30% of normal. A further eight patients 
with a variety of POLG mutations have been described 
and mtDNA depletion found in the liver and brain of 
two patients from whom samples were available.
54
 One 
infant presented at 5 months with recurrent vomiting, 
feeding diﬃ  culty, growth arrest, hypotonia, areﬂ exia, 
and liver dysfunction. She had a lactic acidosis and 
severe hypomyelinating neuropathy, and died at 
6 months with respiratory failure. She was a compound 
heterozygote for mutations in the POLG gene. Both 
parents were carriers and suﬀ ered severe hypofertility.
POLG mutations have been described in patients with 
either autosomal dominant or recessive PEO. Many cases 
comprise a complex clinical phenotype which could be 
conﬁ ned to PEO or include neuropathy, ataxia, mental 
retardation, psychiatric disorders, deafness and 
cataracts.
49,59
 Muscle biopsy showed ragged red, COX 
negative ﬁ bres, multiple respiratory chain defects, and 
multiple mtDNA deletions on Southern blotting. 
POLG mutations have also been identiﬁ ed in patients 
with PEO and parkinsonism. Autosomal dominant or 
recessive inheritance of PEO with age of onset ranging 
from 10 to 54 years was followed some years later (range 
6–40 years) by the development of an asymmetric, 
levodopa-responsive bradykinetic-rigid syndrome 
together with resting tremor in some patients. Additional 
features included variable limb, pharyngeal, or facial 
weakness; cataracts; ataxia; peripheral neuropathy and 
premature ovarian failure.
60
 Muscle biopsy showed 
ragged red, cytochrome oxidase negative ﬁ bres in all 
patients with multiple mtDNA deletions on Southern 
blotting. Symmetrically reduced striatal [18-F]β-CFT was 
seen in two patients. Brain histology was available on a 
further two patients, and both showed severe loss of 
substantia nigral dopaminergic neurones but without 
the development of Lewy bodies or other synuclein 
aggregates. Four families had the same A2864G 
mutation inherited autosomally in three and with a 
founder eﬀ ect in the fourth. Mutations in the exonuclease 
or polymerase portions of the gene were identiﬁ ed in 
the autosomal recessive families. A patient with 
autosomal dominant PEO-parkinsonism and an A2492G 
mutation has also been reported.
61
Deoxyguanosine kinase and thymidine kinase mutations 
MtDNA depletion syndrome usually presents in the 
neonatal period or infancy with myopathy, liver failure, 
lactic acidosis and more rarely, de Toni Fanconi syndrome. 
Other reports describe patients with myopathy and 
progressive encephalomyopathy. Investigation shows 
defective respiratory chain function and a variable degree 
of mtDNA depletion. In some patients, only 1% of mtDNA 
might remain in a tissue, and such individuals usually die 
within a few weeks. A later onset form is associated with 
less severe depletion. The early onset hepatocerebral form 
is associated with mutations in the deoxyguanosine 
kinase gene,
62
 and the late onset myopathic form to 
mutations in thymidine kinase 2.
63
One of the intriguing features of mtDNA depletion 
syndrome is that although infants are born with severe 
mtDNA deﬁ ciency, their development to birth is 
apparently normal. A study that used cultured ﬁ broblasts 
from depletion patients showed that the patients’ 
mitochondria replicated only during the S-phase, in 
contrast with control cells in which mitochondria 
replicated independently of cell cycle.
6
 Exponentially 
growing patient cells were able to maintain a normal level 
of mtDNA, but this fell during the resting phase. The 
explanation for these observations resides in the ability of 
mtDNA to use cytosolic deoxynucleotides generated 
during nuclear DNA replication. However, levels are 
insuﬃ  cient to support mtDNA replication at other phases 
of the cell cycle, during which mtDNA in control cells 
would continue to replicate. Thus fetal development 
might be normal because the high rate of cell proliferation 
supports mtDNA replication but after birth, when cell 
proliferation declines, so too do mtDNA levels with the 
consequent biochemical decompensation. The implication 
is that nucleotide (dGMP and dAMP) supplementation 
after birth could prevent mtDNA depletion. Such an eﬀ ect 
has been proven in vitro, but has not as yet been tried in 
patients.
6
MtDNA depletion is clearly a genetically heterogeneous 
disorder and additional genes causing infantile fatal 
depletion syndrome have yet to be identiﬁ ed. Thymidine 
phosphorylase mutations causing mitochondrial 
neurogastrointestinal encephalomyopathy (MNGIE) also 
result in mtDNA depletion but not as severe as in the 
infantile forms. MNGIE is associated with high levels of 
blood thymidine that somehow interfere with mito-
chondrial nucleotide pools. ANT1 and POLG mutations 
can also cause mtDNA depletion, but again in more 
modest form than in the infantile depletion syndrome.
Mutations aﬀ ecting respiratory chain protein assembly 
or stability
Cytochrome oxidase (COX) deﬁ ciency is a well-recognised 
biochemical and histochemical mitochondrial phenotype 
particularly in paediatric practice. It is probably the 
commonest respiratory chain defect and, genetically, a 
heterogenous group of disorders. Several mutations have 
Review
76 www.thelancet.com   Vol 368   July 1, 2006
been described in the mtDNA COX genes and associated 
with a range of phenotypes including pure myopathy, 
MELAS, sideroblastic anaemia, encephalomyopathy, and 
a motor neurone disease-like presentation.
64
 No mutation 
has yet been described in any of the nuclear-encoded 
COX subunits. 
Several mutations have been identiﬁ ed in nuclear 
genes for mitochondrial proteins involved in the assembly 
and maintenance of COX including SCO2,
65
 SURF1,
66,67
 
COX 10,
68
 COX15,
69
 and LRPPRC.
70
 These result in 
autosomal recessive COX deﬁ ciency that usually presents 
in early life with Leigh syndrome, myopathy, and 
encephalopathy, lactic acidosis, and a progressive course 
with early death. Muscle biopsy shows severe, but not 
complete, COX deﬁ ciency on histochemistry, which can 
be conﬁ rmed by enzymatic assay.
71
 The genes for these 
proteins have yeast homologues but a search for 
mutations of additional COX assembly genes (COX16, 
COX19, and PET191) was negative in 53 patients with 
isolated COX deﬁ ciency.
72
Mutations in the BSC1L gene result in defective 
assembly of complex III. These are rare and have been 
associated with either Leigh syndrome,
73
 or a phenotype 
comprising growth retardation, aminoaciduria, 
cholestasis, iron overload, lactic acidosis, and early death 
(GRACILE).
74
 One case of complex V deﬁ ciency has been 
attributed to a mutation of the gene for ATP12 assembly 
protein.
75
Coenzyme Q
10 
deﬁ ciency
Coenzyme Q
10
 is a lipophilic component of the respiratory 
chain that transfers electrons from complexes I and II, 
and from fatty acids and branched chain aminoacids via 
ﬂ avin-linked dehydrogenases, to complex III (ﬁ gure 2). 
The ﬁ rst report of human disease associated with 
coenzyme Q
10
 deﬁ ciency was in a patient with 
encephalomyopathy and recurrent myoglobinuria with 
ragged red ﬁ bres and changes of lipid storage on muscle 
biopsy.
76
 Severe coenzyme Q
10 
deﬁ ciency was then 
described in six patients with early-onset (age range 
0–16 years) myopathy and ataxia.
77
 Seizures, weakness, 
and mental retardation was described in some, and 
cerebellar atrophy in all. Genetic testing for Friedreich’s 
ataxia and spinocerebellar ataxia was negative, and 
inheritance was consistent with an autosomal recessive 
pattern. Muscle biopsy in these patients showed non-
speciﬁ c abnormalities only and, in particular, no evidence 
of mitochondrial pathology. Residual muscle coenzyme 
Q
10
 levels were 26–35% of normal. Coenzyme Q
10 
administration (300–3000 mg/day) resulted in signiﬁ cant 
improvement in the ataxia. 
Subsequent assay of muscle coenzyme Q
10
 levels in 
135 patients with genetically undeﬁ ned childhood onset 
ataxia identiﬁ ed signiﬁ cantly reduced levels in 10%.
78
 All 
patients had cerebellar atrophy and some had seizures, 
developmental delay, and pyramidal features. Lactic 
acidosis in the ataxic patients is rare, and in contrast with 
the myopathic form, the muscle biopsy can seem normal 
in the ataxic form. The same researchers later described 
muscle coenzyme Q
10 
deﬁ ciency in two brothers with 
adult-onset (age 29 and 39 years) progressive cerebellar 
ataxia with cerebellar atrophy and hypergonadotrophic 
hypogonadism. Muscle morphology showed neurogenic 
changes only. Coenzyme Q
10
 750–1200 mg/day led to 
improved ataxia, neurophysiology, and normal testosterone 
levels within 2 months. A pure myopathic form of 
coenzyme Q
10 
deﬁ ciency, without recurrent myoglobinuria 
but with mild mitochondrial changes on muscle biopsy, 
has been described.
79
 
Mitochondria and neurodegenerative diseases
Abnormalities of mtDNA or OXPHOS activity have been 
identiﬁ ed in several diﬀ erent neurodegenerative diseases. 
An important issue is whether these represent primary 
abnormalities or defects because of other factors not 
directly related to pathogenesis. To some extent, this could 
be a circular argument, at least in relation to whether 
improving mitochondrial function can improve the 
outcome of these diseases. If mitochondrial dysfunction 
contributes to pathogenesis, ameliorating its eﬀ ects could 
contribute to modifying the course of disease. 
Parkinson’s disease
The link between Parkinson’s disease (PD) and 
mitochondria was ﬁ rst established with the identiﬁ cation 
of a deﬁ ciency in the activity of complex I in PD substantia 
nigra
80
 and subsequently in the peripheral tissues of 
patients.
81–83
 Complex I is the target of toxins known to 
produce parkinsonian features in people, such as MPTP 
and anonnacin, and also the target of toxins used to 
produce animal models of PD, such as rotenone and 
tetrahydroisoquinolines. Inhibition of complex I results in 
increased free radical generation and could contribute to 
the oxidative mediated damage seen in the PD nigra. This 
relationship is reciprocal in that free radicals can damage 
the respiratory chain and reduce activity, particularly of 
complexes I and IV. The pathogenesis of PD also includes 
protein aggregation (Lewy bodies). Mitochondrial 
dysfunction will contribute to dysfunction of the energy-
dependent ubiquitin proteasomal system (UPS), and 
oxidative stress will add to the substrate load. This 
combination has been shown to enhance dopaminergic 
cell damage and death.
84
 
Environmental and genetic factors important in PD 
interact with mitochondrial function. Environmental 
toxins that induce dopaminergic cell death and 
parkinsonism in people and in animal models, inhibit 
complex I. Genetic causes of familial PD aﬀ ect 
mitochondrial function. For instance, over-expression of 
α-synuclein inhibits mitochondrial activity,
85,86
 parkin-
knockout mice have a striatal respiratory chain defect,
87
 
parkin-knockout ﬂ ies have skeletal muscle mitochondrial 
abnormalities,
88
 and parkin-positive PD patients have 
complex I deﬁ ciency.
89
 Over-expression models of parkin 
Review
www.thelancet.com   Vol 368   July 1, 2006 77
have shown localisation of the protein to mitochondria.
90
 
Mutations of DJ1 cause PD and this protein localises to 
the outer mitochondrial membrane under conditions of 
oxidative stress and is thought to have a role in antioxidant 
defences.
91
 Mutations in the PINK1 gene that cause 
autosomal dominant PD have been described, and the 
protein product localises to the mitochondrion.
92,93
 The 
function of PINK1 is not known but it is a protein kinase 
and mutations enhance sensitivity to UPS inhibitors and 
lower the threshold to apoptotic cell death. Thus, the 
current pathogenetic model of PD reﬂ ects a complex 
network of interacting biochemical abnormalities that are 
in turn a consequence of genetic and environmental 
factors (ﬁ gure 3).
The relation between mitochondrial dysfunction, 
mtDNA, and PD has been highlighted further by the 
recent description of mtDNA abnormalities in PD 
patients. Occasional mtDNA point mutations have been 
identiﬁ ed in PD but these have not been present in the 
general PD population. Thus, their association with PD 
might merely represent part of the wide clinical spectrum 
of mtDNA mutations and not necessarily imply a more 
common role in sporadic PD. POLG mutations have 
been described in patients with CPEO and PD with 
ragged red ﬁ bres and multiple mtDNA deletions, but 
mutations of this gene have not been found in sporadic 
PD.
94
 A mutation in the mtDNA 12S RNA was identiﬁ ed 
in a patient with maternally inherited early onset PD, 
deafness, and neuropathy.
95
 Several studies that have 
sequenced mtDNA in PD patients have not identiﬁ ed 
any consistent mutations.
96
 However, none of the studies 
to date has focused on PD patients with complex I 
deﬁ ciency. Two studies have shown a link between 
mtDNA haplotypes and the risk for developing PD. The 
ﬁ rst showed a reduced risk for PD in individuals with 
haplotypes J and K,
97
 and the second a 22% decrease in 
PD risk in those with the UKJT haplotype cluster.
98
 In 
contrast, a smaller study reported an increased risk for 
PD with haplotypes J and T.
99
The relation between mitochondrial dysfunction and 
PD has been exploited in an attempt to develop treatment 
that might improve disease progression. Coenzyme Q
10
 
both enhances respiratory chain function and scavenges 
free radicals, and therefore might be predicted to have a 
beneﬁ cial eﬀ ect upon PD pathogenesis. A pilot study 
with three diﬀ erent doses of coenzyme Q
10
 in early 
untreated PD patients showed that the highest dose 
(1200 mg/day) produced a signiﬁ cant improvement in 
clinical scores compared with placebo at 16 months.
100 
As 
noted by the investigators, this result must be regarded 
as provisional, and coenzyme Q
10
 will be the subject of 
further study alone or in combination with other putative 
disease modifying therapies.
Alzheimer’s disease
Mutations in the genes for amyloid precursor protein or 
presenilin 1 and 2 are associated with familial Alzheimer’s 
disease (AD). Amyloid (Aβ) can inhibit OXPHOS in 
mitochondria.
101
 Impaired OXPHOS has been shown in 
astrocytes cultured from Down’s syndrome patients, and 
impaired OXPHOS causes accumulation of the toxic Aβ42 
peptide.
102
 Several studies have shown impaired COX 
activity, reduced immunoreactive protein, or decreased 
mRNA for mtDNA encoded proteins in the AD brain,
103–107
 
although these ﬁ ndings are not invariable.
108,109
 COX 
deﬁ ciency present in platelets from AD patients
110
 can be 
transferred to ρ
0
 cells by the AD mtDNA.
111
 However, no 
mtDNA mutation has consistently been identiﬁ ed in AD, 
and the COX deﬁ ciency could represent secondary damage 
from, for instance, free radical generation. This conclusion 
is supported by the ﬁ nding that AD brains harbour a 15-
fold increase in the 5 Kb “common” mtDNA deletion,
112
 
this particular mutation is known to arise in somatic form 
with increasing age. AD brains have also been shown to 
have a high proportion of mtDNA control region (including 
the L-strand and H-strand promoters) heteroplasmic 
mutations that increase with age.
113
 These somatic 
mutations are associated with reductions in the L-strand 
complex I MTND6 gene transcript and mtDNA copy 
number.
Perhaps the most interesting development in the 
relation of mitochondria to AD has come with the 
observation that Aβ interacts directly with Aβ-binding 
alcohol dehydrogenase (ABAD), a mitochondrial enzyme.
114
 
This protein-protein interaction seems very speciﬁ c, 
occurring at nanomolar concentrations, and results in the 
inhibition of ABAD. ABAD is important in cell function; 
its inactivation results in a lethal phenotype.
115
 It is 
upregulated in AD neurones
116
 and its co-expression with 
amyloid precursor protein (APP) exacerbates A-β induced 
free radical mediated cell damage and death.
117
 ABAD-Aβ 
complex was present in mitochondria isolated from 
transgenic mutant APP mice but only in trace amounts in 
age-matched control littermates. ABAD and Aβ extensively 
co-localise in the mitochondria of AD cortex and this 
interaction causes mitochondrial stress and apoptosis and 
Mitochondrial dysfunction
Environmental
toxins
Genetic defect
Increased free radicals
Damaged
proteins
Aggregates
Proteosomal dysfunction
Cell damage/death
Parkinson’s disease
Figure 3: Potential link between environmental and genetic factors, and 
Parkinson’s disease
Review
78 www.thelancet.com   Vol 368   July 1, 2006
is associated with a learning deﬁ cit.
114
 The consequences 
of the A-β-ABAD interaction could explain COX deﬁ ciency 
in AD on the basis of free radical mediated damage.
Other neurodegenerative diseases
This review cannot provide a comprehensive discussion 
of all the neurodegenerative diseases in which 
mitochondrial dysfunction has been identiﬁ ed or 
implicated in pathogenesis. However, reviews by other 
researchers can be helpful in this area
3,118
—a brief 
synopsis of recent developments is provided here.
Both structural and functional mitochondria 
abnormalities have been identiﬁ ed in motor neurone 
disease spinal cord. Rather like in AD, the predominant 
and most consistent defect is in COX activity. Superoxide 
dismutase (SOD)-1 is located both in the cytosol and the 
mitochondrial intermembraneous space, and the import 
of mutant SOD1 into mitochondria is impaired.
119
 This 
observation provides a direct link between SOD1 
mutations that cause familial motor neurone disease, 
and mitochondrial dysfunction. 
In 97% of patients with Friedreich’s ataxia, the condition 
is caused by abnormally expanded homozygous GAA 
repeats in intron 1 of the gene for frataxin. Frataxin is a 
mitochondrial protein that seems to be involved in haem 
biosynthesis and in the construction of iron-sulphur 
proteins, such as those that play a critical role in 
OXPHOS, as well as in aconitase, an enzyme involved in 
both the Krebs cycle and the regulation of iron 
homeostasis. Because a severe defect in OXPHOS activity 
has been shown in tissues of Friedreich’s ataxia patients, 
researchers believe that this and the reduction in 
aconitase activity contribute directly to pathogenesis. An 
important step in this pathway to cell damage and death 
in Friedreich’s ataxia is thought to be the generation of 
free radicals.
However, complete frataxin deﬁ ciency in a conditional 
knockout murine model of Friedreich’s ataxia did not 
cause oxidative stress, and longevity was not prolonged 
by antioxidants.
120
 In the Friedreich’s ataxia mouse model, 
idebenone marginally delayed disease onset and 
prolonged survival,
121
 and idebenone alone or high dose 
coenzyme Q
10
 with vitamin E have improved cardiac 
bioenergetics and cardiac function in FRDA patients,
122,123
 
with a sustained eﬀ ect of coenzyme Q
10
 with vitamin E 
over 4 years.
124
 Researchers have assumed that these 
compounds have been acting through an antioxidant 
eﬀ ect as well as by stimulating OXPHOS, but the data 
described in the mouse model might need a reassessment 
of this.
Expansion of mitochondrial pathology
Mitochondria has long been thought to be involved in 
ageing. Two studies have highlighted the potential 
involvement of mitochondria in senescence.
125,126
 The 
knock-in of a homozygous proof-reading deﬁ cient POLG 
genotype resulted in an accumulation of mtDNA point 
mutations and deletions and a phenotype that included 
shortened life-span, weight loss, osteoporosis, kyphosis, 
reduced subcutaneous fat, alopecia, reduced fertility, and 
cardiac hypertrophy.
125
 These results support the 
proposition that the accumulation of mtDNA mutations 
that occurs with ageing can directly contribute to a 
senescent phenotype. The evidence that mitochondrial 
but not cytosolic targeting of catalase (an antioxidant 
enzyme) over-expression enhances lifespan and reduces 
age-related cardiac pathology and cataracts further 
emphasises the contribution of the mitochondrion to 
free-radical mediated cellular damage and dysfunction 
and the relation to ageing.
126
 
Abnormalities of mtDNA or mitochondrial dysfunction, 
or both, have been described in several diseases. A critical 
approach is important in determining whether 
mitochondrial abnormalities play a direct part in 
pathogenesis. Some observations include the description 
of mtDNA mutations in various cancers including that of 
the colon
127
 and prostate.
128
 One report found that 11–12% 
of prostate cancer patients had mutations in the MTCOX1 
gene of mtDNA, compared with 7·8% of controls.
129
 
These mutations comprised both germ-line and somatic 
base changes that, in one particular case involving an 
ATPase gene mutation, resulted in increased free radical 
production and an increase in tumour size. Insulin-
resistant oﬀ spring of patients with type 2 diabetes have 
been shown to have reduced insulin stimulated muscle 
glucose uptake, increased intramyocellular lipid and 
impaired OXPHOS in muscle as determined by 
phosphorous magnetic resonance spectroscopy, which 
might indicate an inherited or acquired mitochondrial 
defect.
130
 Microarray analysis has shown reduced 
expression of OXPHOS genes in skeletal muscle from 
patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus.
131
 These changes 
might be mediated by a transcriptional coactivator 
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma 
coactivator-1alpha (PGC-1alpha). Oestrogen-related 
receptor alpha (Erralpha) is also a transcriptional factor 
regulating OXPHOS and mediating the eﬀ ects of PGC-
1alpha.
132
 On the basis of these ﬁ ndings, researchers 
propose that Erralpha agonists could be used to treat 
insulin resistance in patients with type 2 diabetes.
Treatment of mitochondrial diseases
Treatment for diseases caused by mutations of mtDNA 
remains unsatisfactory and mostly conﬁ ned to supportive 
measures, such as eye props or ptosis surgery for patients 
with CPEO. Although coenzyme Q
10 
has shown some early 
promise in Parkinson’s disease and Friedreich’s ataxia, 
such results can only be regarded as provisional at this 
stage. There have been no large-scale studies to determine 
the eﬀ ectiveness of coenzyme Q
10 
in primary mtDNA 
diseases. Since defects of the respiratory chain result in the 
increased production of free radicals, the use of antioxidants 
has some sound basis. N-acetylcysteine and coenzyme Q
10
, 
both antioxidants, improved OXPHOS function and 
Review
www.thelancet.com   Vol 368   July 1, 2006 79
reduced free radical production in cybrid (cytoplasmic 
hybrid) cells carrying the T8993G mutation that causes 
NARP or MILS.
133
 However, the use of antioxidants in 
mtDNA disease has yet to be tested in a clinical trial. 
Various strategies are being assessed to modify the 
mtDNA mutant load in cells and tissues in patients. An 
obvious target would be the preferential expansion of wild-
type mtDNA or the suppression of mutant mtDNA 
expansion.
134
 The recruitment of skeletal muscle satellite 
cell expansion seems to shift heteroplasmy in favour of 
wild type since mutant mtDNA is absent or present at a 
low level in these cells.
135
 Satellite cells can be provoked to 
expand by vigorous exercise regimens or toxic damage, 
although, for obvious reasons, both have some practical 
limitation in patients. Manipulating mtDNA replication by 
the import into mitochondria of endonucleases that might 
selectively destroy a speciﬁ c mutant sequence has been 
possible in vitro, but presents many challenges to transfer 
this to an in vivo application.
136 
An alternative mechanism 
for salvaging OXPHOS function in cells with tRNA 
mutations of mtDNA is the import of normal tRNAs from 
the cytosol to mitochondria. The import of nuclear-encoded 
RNAs into the mitochondrial matrix has been done.
137
 The 
import of normal tRNA
lys 
from cytosol to mitochondria 
improved OXPHOS function in cybrid cells bearing the 
tRNA
lys
 A8344G mutation that causes MERRF.
138
 
The inheritance of primary mtDNA mutations will be 
maternal—ie, from the mother to all oﬀ spring, and 
subsequently transmitted by the daughters alone. 
Although there is one report of paternal inheritance,
14
 
males who carry a primary mtDNA mutation are highly 
unlikely to transmit the mutation. Mothers with CPEO 
and single deletions have a low risk of transmission (4%) 
and the risk of more than one sibling being aﬀ ected is 
also low.
31
 Mitochondrial diseases caused by nuclear gene 
mutations will be transmitted by Mendelian inheritance. 
Genetic counselling in mitochondrial disorders is a 
considerable challenge given the diversity of the clinical 
manifestations and the poor link between phenotype and 
genotype. Practical advice can include the possibility of 
in-vitro fertilisation with a donor egg, but another 
possibility for the future is of nuclear transfer from a 
maternal egg and fertilisation in a donor cytoplasm using 
paternal sperm. The recurrence risks for the relative of 
an individual with LHON are 30% for brothers, 8% for 
sisters, 46% for nephews, 10% for nieces, and 31% and 
6% for male and female cousins, respectively.
139
Conclusions
MtDNA mutations and mitochondrial dysfunction have 
been associated with, and implicated in, the aetiology 
and pathogenesis of a wide range of multi-system human 
diseases. The spectrum of mitochondrial diseases has 
been expanded by the recognition that mutations in the 
genes for nuclear-encoded mitochondrial proteins cause 
not only a number of neurodegenerative diseases but 
also haematological and ophthalmological disorders. 
Toxic inﬂ uences of drugs such as the reverse transcriptase 
inhibitors used in HIV infection further emphasise the 
importance of mitochondria in human pathology. The 
ﬁ eld of mitochondrial diseases has progressed rapidly, 
but much remains to be learnt about molecular 
mechanisms in pathogenesis and about how we might 
treat patients with these disorders.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the Medical Research Council, the 
Wellcome Trust, and the Parkinson’s Disease Society.
Conﬂ ict of interest statement
I declare that I have no conﬂ ict of interest.
References
1 Leonard JV, Schapira AH. Mitochondrial respiratory chain 
disorders I: mitochondrial DNA defects. Lancet 2000; 355: 299–304.
2 Leonard JV, Schapira AH. Mitochondrial respiratory chain 
disorders II: neurodegenerative disorders and nuclear gene defects. 
Lancet 2000; 355: 389–94.
3 Schapira AH. The “new” mitochondrial disorders. 
J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 2002; 72: 144–49.
4 DiMauro S, Schon EA. Mitochondrial respiratory-chain diseases. 
N Engl J Med 2003; 348: 2656–68.
5 Chinnery PF, Schon EA. Mitochondria. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 
2003; 74: 1188–99.
6 Taanman JW, Muddle JR, Muntau AC. Mitochondrial DNA 
depletion can be prevented by dGMP and dAMP supplementation 
in a resting culture of deoxyguanosine kinase-deﬁ cient ﬁ broblasts. 
Hum Mol Genet 2003; 12: 1839–45. 
7 Fish J, Raule N, Attardi G. Discovery of a major D-loop replication 
origin reveals two modes of human mtDNA synthesis. Science 2004; 
306: 2098–101.
8 Torroni A, Petrozzi M, D’Urbano L, et al. Haplotype and 
phylogenetic analyses suggest that one European-speciﬁ c mtDNA 
background plays a role in the expression of Leber hereditary optic 
neuropathy by increasing the penetrance of the primary mutations 
11778 and 14484. Am J Hum Genet 1997; 60: 1107–21.
9 Wallace DC, Brown MD, Lott MT. Mitochondrial DNA variation in 
human evolution and disease. Gene 1999; 238: 211–30.
10 Holt IJ, Dunbar DR, Jacobs HT. Behaviour of a population of 
partially duplicated mitochondrial DNA molecules in cell culture: 
segregation, maintenance and recombination dependent upon 
nuclear background. Hum Mol Genet 1997; 6: 1251–60.
11 Tang Y, Manfredi G, Hirano M, Schon EA. Maintenance of human 
rearranged mitochondrial DNAs in long-term cultured 
transmitochondrial cell lines. Mol Biol Cell 2000; 11: 2349–58.
12 D’Aurelio M, Gajewski CD, Lin MT, et al. Heterologous 
mitochondrial DNA recombination in human cells. Hum Mol Genet 
2004; 13: 3171–79.
13 Gu M, Cooper JM, Taanman JW, Schapira AH. Mitochondrial DNA 
transmission of the mitochondrial defect in Parkinson’s disease. 
Ann Neurol 1998; 44: 177–86.
14 Schwartz M, Vissing J. Paternal inheritance of mitochondrial DNA. 
N Engl J Med 2002; 347: 576–80.
15 Marchington DR, Scott Brown MS, Lamb VK, et al. No evidence for 
paternal mtDNA transmission to oﬀ spring or extra-embryonic 
tissues after ICSI. Mol Hum Reprod 2002; 8: 1046–49.
16 Danan C, Sternberg D, Van Steirteghem A, et al. Evaluation of 
parental mitochondrial inheritance in neonates born after 
intracytoplasmic sperm injection. Am J Hum Genet 1999; 65: 463–73.
17 Houshmand M, Holme E, Hanson C, Wennerholm UB, 
Hamberger L. Is paternal mitochondrial DNA transferred to the 
oﬀ spring following intracytoplasmic sperm injection?
J Assist Reprod Genet 1997; 14: 223–27.
18 Sutovsky P, Moreno RD, Ramalho-Santos J, Dominko T, Simerly C, 
Schatten G. Ubiquitin tag for sperm mitochondria. Nature 1999; 
402: 371–72.
19 Sutovsky P, Van Leyen K, McCauley T, Day BN, Sutovsky M. 
Degradation of paternal mitochondria after fertilization: 
implications for heteroplasmy, assisted reproductive technologies 
and mtDNA inheritance. Reprod Biomed Online 2004; 8: 24–33.
Review
80 www.thelancet.com   Vol 368   July 1, 2006
20 St John J, Sakkas D, Dimitriadi K, et al. Failure of elimination of 
paternal mitochondrial DNA in abnormal embryos. Lancet 2000; 
355: 200.
21 Filosto M, Mancuso M, Vives-Bauza C, et al. Lack of paternal 
inheritance of muscle mitochondrial DNA in sporadic 
mitochondrial myopathies. Ann Neurol 2003; 54: 524–26.
22 Taylor RW, McDonnell MT, Blakely EL, et al. Genotypes from 
patients indicate no paternal mitochondrial DNA contribution. 
Ann Neurol 2003; 54: 521–24.
23 Chinnery PF, Howell N, Lightowlers RN, Turnbull DM. MELAS 
and MERRF. The relationship between maternal mutation load and 
the frequency of clinically aﬀ ected oﬀ spring. Brain 1998; 121: 
1889–94.
24 Tranebjaerg L, Schwartz C, Eriksen H, et al. A new X linked recessive 
deafness syndrome with blindness, dystonia, fractures, and mental 
deﬁ ciency is linked to Xq22. J Med Genet 1995; 32: 257–63.
25 Ezquerra M, Campdelacreu J, Munoz E, Tolosa E, Marti MJ. A novel 
intronic mutation in the DDP1 gene in a family with X-linked 
dystonia-deafness syndrome. Arch Neurol 2005; 62: 306–08.
26 Majamaa K, Moilanen JS, Uimonen S, et al. Epidemiology of 
A3243G, the mutation for mitochondrial encephalomyopathy, lactic 
acidosis, and strokelike episodes: prevalence of the mutation in an 
adult population. Am J Hum Genet 1998; 63: 447–54.
27 Chinnery PF, Johnson MA, Wardell TM, et al. The epidemiology of 
pathogenic mitochondrial DNA mutations. Ann Neurol 2000; 48: 
188–93.
28 Darin N, Oldfors A, Moslemi AR, Holme E, Tulinius M. The 
incidence of mitochondrial encephalomyopathies in childhood: 
clinical features and morphological, biochemical, and DNA 
abnormalities. Ann Neurol 2001; 49: 377–83.
29 Skladal D, Halliday J, Thorburn DR. Minimum birth prevalence of 
mitochondrial respiratory chain disorders in children. Brain 2003; 
126: 1905–12.
30 Holt IJ, Harding AE, Morgan-Hughes JA. Deletions of muscle 
mitochondrial DNA in patients with mitochondrial myopathies. 
Nature 1988; 331: 717–19.
31 Chinnery PF, DiMauro S, Shanske S, et al. Risk of developing a 
mitochondrial DNA deletion disorder. Lancet 2004; 364: 592–96.
32 Servidei S. Mitochondrial encephalomyopathies: gene mutation. 
Neuromuscul Disord 2004; 14: 107–16.
33 Wilson FH, Hariri A, Farhi A, et al. A cluster of metabolic defects 
caused by mutation in a mitochondrial tRNA. Science 2004; 306: 
1190–94.
34 McFarland R, Schaefer AM, Gardner JL, et al. Familial myopathy: 
new insights into the T14709C mitochondrial tRNA mutation. 
Ann Neurol 2004; 55: 478–84.
35 Cock.HR, Cooper J, Schapira A. Nuclear complementation in 
Leber’s hereditary optic neuropathy. Neurology 1995; 45: 294.
36 Man PY, Griﬃ  ths PG, Brown DT, Howell N, Turnbull DM, 
Chinnery PF. The epidemiology of Leber hereditary optic 
neuropathy in the North East of England. Am J Hum Genet 2003; 
72: 333–39.
37 Valentino ML, Barboni P, Ghelli A, et al. The ND1 gene of complex 
I is a mutational hot spot for Leber’s hereditary optic neuropathy. 
Ann Neurol 2004; 56: 631–41.
38 Valentino ML, Avoni P, Barboni P, et al. Mitochondrial DNA 
nucleotide changes C14482G and C14482A in the ND6 gene are 
pathogenic for Leber’s hereditary optic neuropathy. Ann Neurol 
2002; 51: 774–78.
39 Qi X, Lewin AS, Hauswirth WW, Guy J. Suppression of complex I 
gene expression induces optic neuropathy. Ann Neurol 2003; 53: 
198–205.
40 Qi X, Lewin AS, Hauswirth WW, Guy J. Optic neuropathy induced 
by reductions in mitochondrial superoxide dismutase. 
Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2003; 44: 1088–96.
41 Qi X, Lewin AS, Sun L, Hauswirth WW, Guy J. SOD2 gene transfer 
protects against optic neuropathy induced by deﬁ ciency of complex 
I. Ann Neurol 2004; 56: 182–91.
42 Beretta S, Mattavelli L, Sala G, et al. Leber hereditary optic 
neuropathy mtDNA mutations disrupt glutamate transport in 
cybrid cell lines. Brain 2004; 127: 2183–92
43 Kaukonen J, Juselius JK, Tiranti V, et al. Role of adenine 
nucleotide translocator 1 in mtDNA maintenance. Science 2000; 
289: 782–85.
44 Spelbrink JN, Li FY, Tiranti V, et al. Human mitochondrial DNA 
deletions associated with mutations in the gene encoding Twinkle, a 
phage T7 gene 4-like protein localized in mitochondria. 
Nat Genet 2001; 28: 223–31.
45 Korhonen JA, Gaspari M, Falkenberg M. TWINKLE Has 5’ -> 3’ DNA 
helicase activity and is speciﬁ cally stimulated by mitochondrial single-
stranded DNA-binding protein. J Biol Chem 2003; 278: 48627–32.
46 Tyynismaa H, Sembongi H, Bokori-Brown M, et al. Twinkle helicase 
is essential for mtDNA maintenance and regulates mtDNA copy 
number. Hum Mol Genet 2004; 13: 3219–27.
47 Kiechl S, Horvath R, Luoma P, et al. Two families with autosomal 
dominant progressive external ophthalmoplegia. 
J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 2004; 75: 1125–28.
48 Hudson G, Deschauer M, Busse K, Zierz S, Chinnery PF. Sensory 
ataxic neuropathy due to a novel C10Orf2 mutation with probable 
germline mosaicism. Neurology 2005; 64: 371–73.
49 Filosto M, Mancuso M, Nishigaki Y, et al. Clinical and genetic 
heterogeneity in progressive external ophthalmoplegia due to 
mutations in polymerase gamma. Arch Neurol 2003; 60: 1279–84.
50 Rovio AT, Marchington DR, Donat S, et al. Mutations at the 
mitochondrial DNA polymerase (POLG) locus associated with male 
infertility. Nat Genet 2001; 29: 261–62.
51 Jensen M, Leﬀ ers H, Petersen JH, et al. Frequent polymorphism of 
the mitochondrial DNA polymerase gamma gene (POLG) in patients 
with normal spermiograms and unexplained subfertility. Hum Reprod 
2004; 19: 65–70.
52 Krausz C, Guarducci E, Becherini L, et al. The clinical signiﬁ cance of 
the POLG gene polymorphism in male infertility. 
J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2004; 89: 4292–97.
53 Naviaux RK, Nguyen KV. POLG mutations associated with Alpers’ 
syndrome and mitochondrial DNA depletion. Ann Neurol 2004; 
55: 706–12.
54 Ferrari G, Lamantea E, Donati A, et al. Infantile hepatocerebral 
syndromes associated with mutations in the mitochondrial DNA 
polymerase-gammaA. Brain 2005; 128: 723 –31.
55 Bohnert B, Noetzel H. Familial spongiform glioneuronal dystrophy. 
Arch Psychiatr Nervenkr 1974; 218: 353–68.
56 Harding BN, Alsanjari N, Smith SJ, et al. Progressive neuronal 
degeneration of childhood with liver disease (Alpers’ disease) 
presenting in young adults. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 1995; 58: 
320–25.
57 Van Goethem G, Dermaut B, Lofgren A, Martin JJ, 
Van Broeckhoven C. Mutation of POLG is associated with 
progressive external ophthalmoplegia characterized by mtDNA 
deletions. Nat Genet 2001; 28: 211–12.
58 Van Goethem G, Martin JJ, Van Broeckhoven C. Progressive 
external ophthalmoplegia and multiple mitochondrial DNA 
deletions. Acta Neurol Belg 2002; 102: 39–42.
59 Mancuso M, Filosto M, Bellan M, et al. POLG mutations causing 
ophthalmoplegia, sensorimotor polyneuropathy, ataxia, and deafness. 
Neurology 2004; 62: 316–18.
60 Luoma P, Melberg A, Rinne JO, et al. Parkinsonism, premature 
menopause, and mitochondrial DNA polymerase gamma mutations: 
clinical and molecular genetic study. Lancet 2004; 364: 875–82.
61 Mancuso M, Filosto M, Oh SJ, DiMauro S. A novel polymerase 
gamma mutation in a family with ophthalmoplegia, neuropathy, and 
Parkinsonism. Arch Neurol 2004; 61: 1777–79.
62 Mandel H, Szargel R, Labay V, et al. The deoxyguanosine kinase gene 
is mutated in individuals with depleted hepatocerebral mitochondrial 
DNA. Nat Genet 2001; 29: 337–41.
63 Saada A, Shaag A, Mandel H, Nevo Y, Eriksson S, Elpeleg O. Mutant 
mitochondrial thymidine kinase in mitochondrial DNA depletion 
myopathy. Nat Genet 2001; 29: 342–44.
64 Barrientos A, Barros MH, Valnot I, Rotig A, Rustin P, Tzagoloﬀ  A. 
Cytochrome oxidase in health and disease. Gene 2002; 286: 53–63.
65 Papadopoulou LC, Sue CM, Davidson MM, et al. Fatal infantile 
cardioencephalomyopathy with COX deﬁ ciency and mutations in 
SCO2, a COX assembly gene. Nat Genet 1999; 23: 333–37.
66 Zhu Z, Yao J, Johns T, et al. SURF1, encoding a factor involved in the 
biogenesis of cytochrome c oxidase, is mutated in Leigh syndrome. 
Nat Genet 1998; 20: 337–43.
67 Tiranti V, Hoertnagel K, Carrozzo R, et al. Mutations of SURF-1 in 
Leigh disease associated with cytochrome c oxidase deﬁ ciency. 
Am J Hum Genet 1998; 63: 1609–21.
Review
www.thelancet.com   Vol 368   July 1, 2006 81
68 Valnot I, Kleist-Retzow JC, Barrientos A, et al. A mutation in 
the human heme A:farnesyltransferase gene (COX10 ) causes 
cytochrome c oxidase deﬁ ciency. Hum Mol Genet 2000; 9: 
1245–49.
69 Antonicka H, Mattman A, Carlson CG, et al. Mutations in COX15 
produce a defect in the mitochondrial heme biosynthetic pathway, 
causing early-onset fatal hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. 
Am J Hum Genet 2003; 72: 101–14.
70 Mootha VK, Lepage P, Miller K, et al. Identiﬁ cation of a gene 
causing human cytochrome c oxidase deﬁ ciency by integrative 
genomics. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2003; 100: 605–10.
71 Coenen MJ, van den Heuvel LP, Ugalde C, et al. Cytochrome c 
oxidase biogenesis in a patient with a mutation in COX10 gene. 
Ann Neurol 2004; 56: 560–64.
72 Tay SK, Nesti C, Mancuso M, et al. Studies of COX16, COX19, and 
PET191 in human cytochrome-c oxidase deﬁ ciency. Arch Neurol 
2004; 61: 1935–37.
73 de Lonlay P, Valnot I, Barrientos A, et al. A mutant mitochondrial 
respiratory chain assembly protein causes complex III deﬁ ciency 
in patients with tubulopathy, encephalopathy and liver failure. 
Nat Genet 2001; 29: 57–60.
74 Visapaa I, Fellman V, Vesa J, et al. GRACILE syndrome, a lethal 
metabolic disorder with iron overload, is caused by a point 
mutation in BCS1L. Am J Hum Genet 2002; 71: 863–76.
75 De Meirleir L, Seneca S, Lissens W, et al. Respiratory chain 
complex V deﬁ ciency due to a mutation in the assembly gene 
ATP12. J Med Genet 2004; 41: 120–24.
76 Ogasahara S, Engel AG, Frens D, Mack D. Muscle coenzyme Q 
deﬁ ciency in familial mitochondrial encephalomyopathy. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1989; 86: 2379–82.
77 Musumeci O, Naini A, Slonim AE, et al. Familial cerebellar 
ataxia with muscle coenzyme Q
10 
deﬁ ciency. Neurology 2001; 56: 
849–55.
78  Lamperti C, Naini A, Hirano M, et al. Cerebellar ataxia and 
coenzyme Q
10
 deﬁ ciency. Neurology 2003; 60: 1206–08.
79  Lalani SR, Vladutiu GD, Plunkett K, Lotze TE, Adesina AM, 
Scaglia F. Isolated mitochondrial myopathy associated with 
muscle coenzyme Q
10 
deﬁ ciency. Arch Neurol 2005; 62: 317–20.
80 Schapira AHV, Cooper JM, Dexter D, Jenner P, Clark JB, 
Marsden CD. Mitochondrial complex I deﬁ ciency in Parkinson’s 
disease. Lancet 1989; 1: 1269.
81 Parker WD Jr, Boyson SJ, Parks JK. Abnormalities of the electron 
transport chain in idiopathic Parkinson’s disease. Ann Neurol 
1989; 26: 719–23. 
82 Wallace DC, Shoﬀ ner JM, Watts RL, Juncos JL, Torroni A. 
Mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation defects in Parkinson’s 
disease. Ann Neurol 1992; 32: 113–14.
83 Krige D, Carroll MT, Cooper JM, Marsden CD, Schapira AH. 
Platelet mitochondrial function in Parkinson’s disease. The Royal 
Kings and Queens Parkinson Disease Research Group. 
Ann Neurol 1992; 32: 782–88.
84 Hoglinger GU, Carrard G, Michel PP, et al. Dysfunction of 
mitochondrial complex I and the proteasome: interactions 
between two biochemical deﬁ cits in a cellular model of 
Parkinson’s disease. J Neurochem 2003; 86: 1297–307.
85 Hsu LJ, Sagara Y, Arroyo A, et al. Alpha-synuclein promotes 
mitochondrial deﬁ cit and oxidative stress. Am J Pathol 2000; 157: 
401–10.
86 Lee SJ. Alpha-synuclein aggregation: a link between 
mitochondrial defects and Parkinson’s disease? Antioxid Redox 
Signal 2003; 5: 337–48.
87 Palacino JJ, Sagi D, Goldberg MS, et al. Mitochondrial 
dysfunction and oxidative damage in parkin-deﬁ cient mice. 
J Biol Chem 2004; 279: 18614–22.
88 Greene JC, Whitworth AJ, Kuo I, Andrews LA, Feany MB, 
Pallanck LJ. Mitochondrial pathology and apoptotic muscle 
degeneration in Drosophila parkin mutants. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2003; 100: 4078–83.
89 Muftuoglu M, Elibol B, Dalmizrak O, et al. Mitochondrial 
complex I and IV activities in leukocytes from patients with 
parkin mutations. Mov Disord 2004; 19: 544–48.
90 Darios F, Corti O, Lucking CB, et al. Parkin prevents mitochondrial 
swelling and cytochrome c release in mitochondria-dependent cell 
death. Hum Mol Genet 2003; 12: 517–26.
91 Canet-Aviles RM, Wilson MA, Miller DW, et al. The Parkinson’s 
disease protein DJ-1 is neuroprotective due to cysteine-sulﬁ nic 
acid-driven mitochondrial localization. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 
2004; 101: 9103–08.
92 Valente EM, Abou-Sleiman PM, Caputo V, et al. Hereditary early-
onset Parkinson’s disease caused by mutations in PINK1. Science 
2004; 304: 1158–60.
93 Beilina A, Van Der BM, Ahmad R, et al. Mutations in PTEN-induced 
putative kinase 1 associated with recessive parkinsonism have 
diﬀ erential eﬀ ects on protein stability. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2005; 
102: 5703–08.
94 Taanman JW, Schapira AH. Analysis of the trinucleotide CAG 
repeat from the DNA polymerase gamma gene (POLG) in patients 
with Parkinson’s disease. Neurosci Lett 2005; 376: 56–59.
95 Thyagarajan D, Bressman S, Bruno C, et al. A novel mitochondrial 
12SrRNA point mutation in parkinsonism, deafness, and 
neuropathy. Ann Neurol 2000; 48: 730–36.
96 Tan EK, Khajavi M, Thornby JI, Nagamitsu S, Jankovic J, 
Ashizawa T. Variability and validity of polymorphism association 
studies in Parkinson’s disease. Neurology 2000; 55: 533–38.
97 van der Walt JM, Nicodemus KK, Martin ER, et al. Mitochondrial 
polymorphisms signiﬁ cantly reduce the risk of Parkinson disease. 
Am J Hum Genet 2003; 72: 804–11.
98 Pyle A, Foltynie T, Tiangyou W, et al. Mitochondrial DNA 
haplogroup cluster UKJT reduces the risk of PD. Ann Neurol 2005; 
57: 564–67.
99 Ross OA, McCormack R, Maxwell LD, et al. mt4216C variant in 
linkage with the mtDNA TJ cluster may confer a susceptibility 
to mitochondrial dysfunction resulting in an increased risk 
of Parkinson’s disease in the Irish. Exp Gerontol 2003; 38: 
397–405.
100 Shults CW, Oakes D, Kieburtz K, et al. Eﬀ ects of coenzyme Q
10
 in 
early Parkinson disease: evidence of slowing of the functional 
decline. Arch Neurol 2002; 59: 1541–50.
101 Casley CS, Canevari L, Land JM, Clark JB, Sharpe MA. Beta-amyloid 
inhibits integrated mitochondrial respiration and key enzyme 
activities. J Neurochem 2002; 80: 91–100.
102 Busciglio J, Pelsman A, Wong C, et al. Altered metabolism of the 
amyloid beta precursor protein is associated with mitochondrial 
dysfunction in Down’s syndrome. Neuron 2002; 33: 677–88.
103 Kish SJ, Bergeron C, Rajput A, et al. Brain cytochrome oxidase in 
Alzheimer’s disease. J Neurochem 1992; 59: 776–79.
104 Parker WD Jr, Parks J, Filley CM, Kleinschmidt-DeMasters BK. 
Electron transport chain defects in Alzheimer’s disease brain. 
Neurology 1994; 44: 1090–96.
105 Parker WD Jr, Parks JK. Cytochrome c oxidase in Alzheimer’s 
disease brain: puriﬁ cation and characterization. Neurology 1995; 
45: 482–86.
106 Chandrasekaran K, Hatanpaa K, Rapoport SI, Brady DR. Decreased 
expression of nuclear and mitochondrial DNA-encoded genes of 
oxidative phosphorylation in association neocortex in Alzheimer 
disease. Brain Res Mol Brain Res 1997; 44: 99–104.
107 Ojaimi J, Masters CL, McLean C, Opeskin K, McKelvie P, 
Byrne E. Irregular distribution of cytochrome c oxidase protein 
subunits in aging and Alzheimer’s disease. Ann Neurol 1999; 46: 
656–60.
108 Cooper JM, Wischik C, Schapira AH. Mitochondrial function in 
Alzheimer’s disease. Lancet 1993; 341: 969–70.
109 Reichmann H, Florke S, Hebenstreit G, Schrubar H, Riederer P. 
Analyses of energy metabolism and mitochondrial genome in post-
mortem brain from patients with Alzheimer’s disease. J Neurol 
1993; 240: 377–80.
110 Parker WD Jr, Filley CM, Parks JK. Cytochrome oxidase deﬁ ciency 
in Alzheimer’s disease. Neurology 1990; 40: 1302–03.
111 Davis RE, Miller S, Herrnstadt C, et al. Mutations in mitochondrial 
cytochrome c oxidase genes segregate with late-onset Alzheimer 
disease. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1997; 94: 4526–31.
112 Corral-Debrinski M, Horton T, Lott MT, et al. Marked changes in 
mitochondrial DNA deletion levels in Alzheimer brains. Genomics 
1994; 23: 471–76.
113 Coskun PE, Beal MF, Wallace DC. Alzheimer’s brains harbor 
somatic mtDNA control-region mutations that suppress 
mitochondrial transcription and replication. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 
2004; 101: 10726–31.
Review
82 www.thelancet.com   Vol 368   July 1, 2006
114 Lustbader JW, Cirilli M, Lin C, et al. ABAD directly links Abeta to 
mitochondrial toxicity in Alzheimer’s disease. Science 2004; 304: 
448–52.
115 Torroja L, Ortuno-Sahagun D, Ferrus A, Hammerle B, Barbas JA. 
Scully, an essential gene of Drosophila, is homologous to 
mammalian mitochondrial type II L-3-hydroxyacyl-CoA 
dehydrogenase/amyloid-beta peptide-binding protein. J Cell Biol 
1998; 141: 1009–17. 
116 Yan SD, Fu J, Soto C, et al. An intracellular protein that binds 
amyloid-beta peptide and mediates neurotoxicity in Alzheimer’s 
disease. Nature 1997; 389: 689–95.
117 Yan SD, Shi Y, Zhu A, et al. Role of ERAB/L-3-hydroxyacyl-
coenzyme A dehydrogenase type II activity in Abeta-induced 
cytotoxicity. J Biol Chem 1999; 274: 2145–56.
118 Schon EA, Manfredi G. Neuronal degeneration and mitochondrial 
dysfunction. J Clin Invest 2003; 111: 303–12.
119 Okado-Matsumoto A, Fridovich I. Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a 
proposed mechanism. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2002; 99: 9010–14.
120 Seznec H, Simon D, Bouton C, et al. Friedreich ataxia: the oxidative 
stress paradox. Hum Mol Genet 2005; 14: 463–74.
121 Seznec H, Simon D, Monassier L, et al. Idebenone delays the onset 
of cardiac functional alteration without correction of Fe-S enzymes 
deﬁ cit in a mouse model for Friedreich ataxia. Hum Mol Genet 2004; 
13: 1017–24.
122 Hausse AO, Aggoun Y, Bonnet D, et al. Idebenone and reduced 
cardiac hypertrophy in Friedreich’s ataxia. Heart 2002; 87: 346–49.
123 Lodi R, Hart PE, Rajagopalan B, et al. Antioxidant treatment 
improves in vivo cardiac and skeletal muscle bioenergetics in 
patients with Friedreich’s ataxia. Ann Neurol 2001; 49: 590–96.
124 Hart PE, Lodi R, Rajagopalan B, et al. Antioxidant treatment of 
patients with Friedreich ataxia: four-year follow-up. Arch Neurol 
2005; 62: 621–26.
125 Trifunovic A, Wredenberg A, Falkenberg M, et al. Premature ageing 
in mice expressing defective mitochondrial DNA polymerase. 
Nature 2004; 429: 417–23.
126 Schriner SE, Linford NJ, Martin GM, et al. Extension of murine life 
span by overexpression of catalase targeted to mitochondria. Science 
2005; 308: 1909–11.
127 Polyak K, Li Y, Zhu H, Lengauer C, et al. Somatic mutations of the 
mitochondrial genome in human colorectal tumours. Nat Genet 
1998; 20: 291–93.
128 Chinnery PF, Samuels DC, Elson J, Turnbull DM. Accumulation of 
mitochondrial DNA mutations in ageing, cancer, and mitochondrial 
disease: is there a common mechanism? Lancet 2002; 360: 1323–25.
129 Petros JA, Baumann AK, Ruiz-Pesini E, et al. mtDNA mutations 
increase tumorigenicity in prostate cancer. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 
2005; 102: 719–24.
130 Petersen KF, Dufour S, Befroy D, Garcia R, Shulman GI. Impaired 
mitochondrial activity in the insulin-resistant oﬀ spring of patients 
with type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med 2004; 350: 664–71. 
131 Mootha VK, Lindgren CM, Eriksson KF, et al. PGC-1alpha-
responsive genes involved in oxidative phosphorylation are 
coordinately downregulated in human diabetes. Nat Genet 2003; 34: 
67–73. 
132 Mootha VK, Handschin C, Arlow D, et al. Erralpha and Gabpa/b 
specify PGC-1alpha-dependent oxidative phosphorylation gene 
expression that is altered in diabetic muscle. Proc Natl Acad Sci 
USA; 101: 6570–75. Erratum in: Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2005; 
102: 10405. 
133 Mattiazzi M, Vijayvergiya C, Gajewski CD, et al. The mtDNA 
T8993G (NARP) mutation results in an impairment of oxidative 
phosphorylation that can be improved by antioxidants. 
Hum Mol Genet 2004; 13: 869–79.
134 Smith PM, Ross GF, Taylor RW, Turnbull DM, Lightowlers RN. 
Strategies for treating disorders of the mitochondrial genome. 
Biochim Biophys Acta 2004; 1659: 232–39.
135 Clark KM, Bindoﬀ  LA, Lightowlers RN, et al. Reversal of a 
mitochondrial DNA defect in human skeletal muscle. Nat Genet 
1997; 16: 222–24.
136 Tanaka M, Borgeld HJ, Zhang J, et al. Gene therapy for 
mitochondrial disease by delivering restriction endonuclease SmaI 
into mitochondria. J Biomed Sci 2002; 9: 534–41.
137 Entelis NS, Kolesnikova OA, Dogan S, Martin RP, Tarassov IA. 
5 S rRNA and tRNA import into human mitochondria: comparison 
of in vitro requirements. J Biol Chem 2001; 276: 45642–53.
138 Kolesnikova OA, Entelis NS, Jacquin-Becker C, et al. Nuclear 
DNA-encoded tRNAs targeted into mitochondria can rescue a 
mitochondrial DNA mutation associated with the MERRF syndrome 
in cultured human cells. Hum Mol Genet 2004; 13: 2519–34.
139 Harding AE, Sweeney MG, Govan GG, Riordan-Eva P. Pedigree 
analysis in Leber hereditary optic neuropathy families with a 
pathogenic mtDNA mutation. Am J Hum Genet 1995; 57: 77–86.
