NEUROSCIENCE FOR NEUROLOGISTS
Mitochondria
P F Chinnery, E A Schon
.............................................................................................................................
J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 2003;74:1188–1199
Following the discovery in the early 1960s that
mitochondria contain their own DNA (mtDNA), there
were two major advances, both in the 1980s: the
human mtDNA sequence was published in 1981, and
in 1988 the first pathogenic mtDNA mutations were
identified. The floodgates were opened, and the 1990s
became the decade of the mitochondrial genome. There
has been a change of emphasis in the first few years of
the new millennium, away from the “magic circle” of
mtDNA and back to the nuclear genome. Various
nuclear genes have been identified that are
fundamentally important for mitochondrial homeostasis,
and when these genes are disrupted, they cause
autosomally inherited mitochondrial disease. Moreover,
mitochondrial dysfunction plays an important role in the
pathophysiology of several well established nuclear
genetic disorders, such as dominant optic atrophy
(mutations in OPA1), Friedreich’s ataxia (FRDA),
hereditary spastic paraplegia (SPG7), and Wilson’s
disease (ATP7B).The next major challenge is to define
the more subtle interactions between nuclear and
mitochondrial genes in health and disease.
..........................................................................
HISTORICAL INTRODUCTION
It is over 40 years since the first human
mitochondrial disease was described in a patient
with non-thyroidal hypermetabolism (Luft
disease).
1
Although this disorder is exceptionally
rare (only two cases have been described), the
clinical description and biochemical studies
paved the way for three decades of clinical and
pathological research on patients with suspected
mitochondrial disease. Patients were classified
into groups based upon the pattern of clinical
involvement, histological and ultrastructural ab-
normalities of mitochondria, and biochemical
assaysofmitochondrialfunction.Itwasclearthat
there were clinical similarities among some
patients, allowing the definition of syndromes
such as the Kearns–Sayre syndrome (KSS) or
chronic progressive external ophthalmoplegia
(CPEO), but it was recognised that there was
considerable phenotypic diversity and that many
patients did not fit neatly into a specific diagnos-
tic group.
The inheritance pattern also varied. Some
patients appeared to be sporadic cases, whereas
others were clearly familial. It was known for
some time that mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) was
maternally inherited, and while some families
displayed a clear maternal inheritance pattern,
others did not. There were attempts to classify
based upon the number and size of mitochondria
in skeletal muscle, leading to terms such as
pleoconial or megaconial myopathies,
2
and also on
the pattern of respiratory chain involvement.
There were those who wanted to subdivide
suspected mitochondrial disease into discrete cat-
egories(the“splitters”
3
)andthosewhothoughtof
all mitochondrial disease as a single,if wide,spec-
trum of disorders (the “lumpers”
4
). At this early
stageitwasapparentthatmitochondrialdisorders
were a heterogeneous group—clinically,histologi-
cally,biochemically,and probably genetically.
Following the discovery in the early 1960s that
mitochondria contain their own DNA (mtDNA),
5
there were two major advances,both in the 1980s:
the human mtDNA sequence was published in
1981,
6
and in 1988 the first pathogenic mtDNA
mutations were identified.
78
The floodgates were
opened, and the 1990s became the decade of the
mitochondrial genome. Over 150 different patho-
genic point mutations and a larger number of dif-
ferent rearrangements (that is, partial deletions
and duplications) of mtDNA were associated with
disease,
9
and there were major advances in our
understanding of the molecular patho-
physiology.
10 11
There has been a change of empha-
sis in the first few years of the new millennium,
away from the “magic circle” of mtDNA and back
to the nuclear genome.
12
Various nuclear genes
have been identified that are fundamentally
important for mitochondrial homeostasis, and
when these genes are disrupted, they cause auto-
somally inherited mitochondrial disease.
13
More-
over, mitochondrial dysfunction plays an impor-
tant role in the pathophysiology of several well
established nuclear genetic disorders, such as
dominant optic atrophy (mutations in OPA1),
14
Friedreich’s ataxia (FRDA),
15
hereditary spastic
paraplegia (SPG7),
16
and Wilson’s disease
(ATP7B).
17
The next major challenge is to define
the more subtle interactions between nuclear and
mitochondrial genes in health and disease. It is
likely that these mechanisms will have broader
relevance for our understanding of many inher-
ited and sporadic neurological disorders.
In this article we will review the basic scientific
principles that underpin our understanding of
mitochondrial pathology. Rather than giving a
comprehensive description of mitochondrial biol-
ogy, we will focus on the bare essential facts that
will help the practising general neurologist to
understand, identify, investigate, and manage
patients with primary mitochondrial disease (by
whichwemeandisordersthatresultdirectlyfrom
mutations either in mtDNA or in nuclear genes
affecting the respiratory chain or mtDNA home-
ostasis). Mitochondrial abnormalities have been
identified in more common sporadic neurological
disorders, including Alzheimer’s disease and Par-
kinson’s disease, and they also occur as part of
See end of article for
authors’ affiliations
.......................
Correspondence to:
DrPFChinnery,
Neurology, The Medical
School, Newcastle upon
Tyne NE2 4HH, UK;
p.f.chinnery@ncl.ac.uk
Received 25 March 2003
In revised form 22 May
2003
Accepted 24 May 2003
.......................
1188
www.jnnp.com
normal aging.
18
The role of these secondary mitochondrial
abnormalities is uncertain,and they will be discussed in other
articles in this series.
WHAT ARE MITOCHONDRIA AND WHAT DO THEY
DO?
Mitochondria are a subcompartment of the cell bound by a
double membrane. Although some mitochondria probably do
look like the traditional cigar shaped structures that appear in
standard textbooks, it is more accurate to think of them as a
budding and fusing network similar to the endoplasmic
reticulum (fig 1).Mitochondria are intimately involved in cel-
lular homeostasis. Among other functions they play a part in
intracellular signalling and apoptosis, intermediary metabo-
lism,and in the metabolism of amino acids,lipids,cholesterol,
steroids, and nucleotides. Apoptosis is discussed in other arti-
cles of this series and will not be considered here. Perhaps
most importantly, mitochondria have a fundamental role in
cellular energy metabolism. This includes fatty acid β
oxidation, the urea cycle, and the final common pathway for
ATP production—the respiratory chain.
The mitochondrial respiratory chain is a group of five
enzyme complexes situated on the inner mitochondrial mem-
brane (fig 2).Each complex is composed of multiple subunits,
the largest being complex I with over 40 polypeptide
components. Reduced cofactors (NADH and FADH
2
) gener-
ated from the intermediary metabolism of carbohydrates,pro-
teins, and fats donate electrons to complex I and complex II.
These electrons flow between the complexes down an electro-
chemical gradient, shuttled by complexes III and IV and by
two mobile electron carriers, ubiquinone (ubiquinol, coen-
zymeQ10)andcytochrome c.Theelectrontransferfunctionof
complexes I–IV is accomplished through subunits harbouring
prosthetic groups (for example, iron–sulphur groups in
complexes I, II, and III, and haem iron in cytochrome c and
complex IV). The liberated energy is used by complexes I, III,
and IV to pump protons (H
+
) out of the mitochondrial matrix
into the intermembrane space. This proton gradient, which
generates the bulk of the mitochondrial membrane potential
(the asymmetrical distribution of ions, such as Na
+
,K
+
, and
Ca
2+
, across the inner membrane makes up the “chemical”
portion of the gradient),is harnessed by complex V to synthe-
sise adenosine triphosphate (ATP) from adenosine diphos-
phate (ADP) and inorganic phosphate. The overall process is
called oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS). ATP is the high
energy source used for essentially all active metabolic
processes within the cell, and it must be released from the
mitochondrion in exchange for cytosolic ADP. This is carried
out by the adenine nucleotide translocator (ANT), which has
various tissue specific isoforms.
Thus the respiratory chain is an elaborate system that must
respond to the energy requirements of the cell. While these
requirements may be constant (for example, in hepatocytes),
they may also change dramatically over short periods of time
(as in skeletal muscle). We are only just beginning to
understand the mechanisms that maintain and regulate a
healthy respiratory chain,and it is likely that many additional
unknown genetic and environmental factors will be involved.
THE GENETIC BASIS OF MITOCHONDRIAL
BIOGENESIS
Two distinct genetic systems encode mitochondrial proteins:
mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) and nuclear DNA (nDNA).
mtDNA is a small 16.6 kb circle of double stranded DNA that
codes for 13 respiratory chain polypeptides and 24 nucleic
acids (two ribosomal RNAs (rRNAs) and 22 transfer RNAs
(tRNAs)) that are needed for intramitochondrial protein syn-
thesis (fig 3).
6
Nuclear genes code for the majority of
mitochondrial respiratory chain polypeptides.
13
These
polypeptides are synthesised in the cytoplasm with a
mitochondrial targeting sequence that directs them through
the translocation machinery spanning the outer and inner
membranes.The targeting sequence is then cleaved before the
subunit is assembled with its counterparts on the inner mito-
chondrial membrane. The components of the import machin-
ery (“TIM” and “TOM” proteins), the importation processing
enzymes, and the respiratory chain assembly proteins are all
the products of nuclear genes.
Nuclear genes are also important for maintaining the mito-
chondrial genome, including those encoding the mito-
chondrial DNA polymerase γ (POLG1)
19
and products that
maintain an appropriate balance of free nucleotides within
the mitochondrion (TP, TK, DGK, and ANT1).
20–23
A recently
described gene, C10orf2, codes for a helicase-like protein
called Twinkle that appears to be important for mtDNA
maintenance.
24
Nuclear DNA also codes for essential factors
needed for intramitochondrial transcription and translation,
including TFAM,TFBM1,and TFBM2.
25 26
A disruption of both
nuclear and mitochondrial genes can therefore cause mito-
chondrial dysfunction and human disease (table 1).
MITOCHONDRIAL DISEASE: GENOTYPE AND
PHENOTYPE
A neurologist who has seen a few patients with mitochondrial
disease will be puzzled by a number of questions.If mitochon-
dria are so important,why don’t mitochondrial diseases affect
every tissue in the body, and if primary mitochondrial
disorders are all genetically determined, why do they have
suchavariedclinicalphenotype,evenwithinthesamefamily?
Recent advances in our understanding of the molecular
pathology of mitochondrial disease have provided us with
some explanations and also raised new questions.
The clinical features of mitochondrial disease have been
discussed widely elsewhere,
27–29
and they will not be consid-
ered in detail here (an overview is given in table 2 and fig 4).
In general terms, tissues and organs that are heavily
dependent upon oxidative phosphorylation bear the brunt of
the pathology.This means that neurological features are com-
mon, but cardiac, endocrine, and ophthalmological features
are often prominent. Other tissues are less dependent upon
sustained oxidative phosphorylation so are less likely to be
involved in mitochondrial disease, but there are some notable
exceptions.
While this general rule is helpful, it can only be part of the
explanation. Mitochondrial disease ultimately reflects a defect
of oxidative phosphorylation within a cell, but the pattern of
Figure 1 Human mitochondria. Scanning fluorescence confocal
micrograph of a cultured human myoblasts stained with the
Mitotracker, which is a fluorescent potentiometric dye taken up
specifically by living mitochondria because of their membrane
potential. Some mitochondria form discrete organelles (short arrow),
but others form a reticulate network (long arrow).
Mitochondria 1189
www.jnnp.com
cellular involvement will determine the clinical features of the
disease. On the one hand, there must be common mechanisms
explaining why patients with mutations in nDNA and mtDNA
can have a similar clinical phenotype (for example, clinically
indistinguishable Leigh syndrome can be caused by mutations
both in the nuclear COX assembly gene SURF1 and the mtDNA
ATPase 6 gene
30 31
). On the other hand, there must be different
mechanisms to explain why the same genetic defect can cause
very different clinical phenotypes (for example, the A3243G
mtDNA mutation in the tRNA
Leu(UUR)
gene can present with clas-
sical MELAS (mitochondrial encephalomyopathy with lactic
acidosis and stroke-like episodes), with CPEO, or with diabetes
and deafness
32–34
). It is also puzzling that many mitochondrial
disorders affect multiple organ systems, whereas others have a
highly stereotyped and organ specific phenotype (such as Leber
hereditary optic neuropathy and aminoglycoside induced
deafness).
35 36
Nuclear genetic mechanisms have been discussed
in the preceding articles in this series, so in this article we will
concentrate on mitochondrial genetic factors.
MITOCHONDRIAL GENETIC FACTORS
mtDNA has unusual properties that are important for our
understanding of mitochondrial disease caused by mtDNA
mutations.
Heteroplasmy and the threshold effect
While most human cells contain two copies of nuclear DNA,
they contain many more copies of mtDNA (from 1000 to
100 000,depending on the cell type).These are all identical in a
healthy individual at birth (homoplasmy). By contrast, patients
harbouring pathogenic mtDNA defects often have a mixture of
mutated and wild-type mtDNA (heteroplasmy).
30
The percentage
of mutated mtDNA can vary widely among different patients,
andalsofromorgantoorgan,andevenbetweencellswithinthe
same individual. In vitro studies using “transmitochondrial
cytoplasmic hybrid (cybrid)” cells
37
containing different
amounts of mutated mtDNA have shown that most mtDNA
mutations are highly recessive. In other words, the cells were
able to tolerate high percentage levels of mutated mtDNA (typi-
cally 70–90%) before they developed a biochemical respiratory
chain defect. The precise threshold for biochemical expression
varies from mutation to mutation, and from tissue to tissue.
Largeretrospectivestudieshaveshownthatthepercentagelevel
of mutated mtDNA in clinically relevant tissues does correlate
with the severity of disease.
38 39
Maternal inheritance and the genetic bottleneck
Although it has been known for some time that mtDNA is
transmitted from mother to offspring,
40
the mechanisms are
only just becoming clear. Sperm contain around 100 mtDNAs
which enter the zygote on fertilisation before being actively
degraded.
41
There has been a recent report of a pathogenic
mtDNA microdeletion in a patient with a sporadic muscle
specific mitochondrial disorder.
42
The mutated mtDNA arose
on a mitochondrial genome that was paternal in origin,bring-
ing into question the traditional dogma of strict maternal
inheritance. However, many families with mtDNA disease
have been studied in detail over the last decade, and there are
nootherreportsofpaternalmtDNAtransmission.Basedupon
the available evidence,paternal leakage is unlikely to be clini-
cally significant.
One of the most remarkable features of mitochondrial dis-
easecausedbymtDNAdefectsistheclinicalvariabilityamong
siblings. This is thought to reflect the mitochondrial “genetic
bottleneck”.
43
Our understanding of the transmission of
mtDNA heteroplasmy has been greatly advanced by detailed
studies of heteroplasmic mice generated by karyoplast
transfer.
44 45
These mice transmit heteroplasmic mtDNA
polymorphisms (table 3). By measuring the variation in
heteroplasmy between the offspring of a single female, and
Figure 2 Schematic diagram of the respiratory chain. Reduced cofactors (NADH and FADH
2
) are produced from the intermediary metabolism
of carbohydrates, proteins, and fats. These cofactors donate electrons to (e
−
) to complex I (NADH-ubiquinone oxidoreductase) and complex II
(succinate-ubiquinone oxidoreductase). These electrons flow between the complexes down an electrochemical gradient (black arrow), shuttled
by ubiquinone (Q) and cytochrome c (C) involving complex III (ubiquinol-cytochrome c oxidase reductase) and complex IV (cytochrome c
oxidase, or COX). Complex IV donates an electron to oxygen which results in the formation of water. Protons (H
+
) are pumped from the
mitochondrial matrix into the intermembrane space (red arrows). This proton gradient generates the mitochondrial membrane potential which is
harnessed by complex V to synthesise adenosine triphosphate (ATP) from adenosine diphosphate (ADP) and inorganic phosphate (Pi). ANT,
adenine nucleotide translocator, which exchanges ADP for ATP across the mitochondrial membrane.
1190 Chinnery, Schon
www.jnnp.com
comparing this to the variation between oocytes at different
stages of development,it was shown that the transmitted per-
centage level of heteroplasmy is determined at an early stage
during oogenesis in a heteroplasmic female developing in
utero.
44
It is likely that there is a restriction in the number of
mitochondrial genomes during early oogenesis, creating a
functional“geneticbottleneck”.Thiscreatesasamplingeffect,
akin to taking a small handful of marbles from a bag contain-
ing a large number of well mixed black and white marbles
while wearing a blindfold.Each independent sample will con-
tain different proportions of the two types, corresponding to
mutated and wild-type mtDNA in the offspring. Recent work
suggests that the same random mechanism operates during
the transmission of pathogenic mtDNA mutations in
humans.
56 57
Whilethisgeneratesvariabilityinthetransmitted
mutation load to the offspring, it occurs within a given confi-
dence interval, explaining why retrospective family studies
haveshownarelationbetweenthelevelofmutatedmtDNA in
the mother and the outcome of pregnancy.
39 58
Although differences in the transmitted mutation load pro-
vide some explanation for the difference in severity between
different family members, it does not explain why one sibling
might present with neurological disease while another might
develop heart failure. Clearly additional factors must come in
to play.
The percentage level of mutated mtDNA in individual
tissues may also change during development and throughout
adult life, potentially influencing the phenotype within an
individual. Two mechanisms contribute to this process:
relaxed replication and mitotic segregation.
Relaxed replication
Unlike nuclear DNA which replicates only once during each
cell cycle, mtDNA is continuously recycled, even in non-
dividing tissues such as skeletal muscle and brain.
59 60
mtDNA
replication is therefore independent of the cell cycle (that is,it
is relaxed). In a heteroplasmic cell, it is possible that mutated
and wild-type mtDNA replicate at subtly different rates—
either because one type was selected for destruction or
replication by chance, or because of a subtle selective effect in
favour of one particular type.In theory,this mechanism could
lead to changes in the proportion of mutated mtDNA that
have been described in patients with mtDNA disease, provid-
ing an explanation for the late onset and progression of some
mtDNA disorders.
61
Mitotic (vegetative) segregation
When a heteroplasmic cell divides, subtle differences in the
proportion of mutated mtDNA may be passed on to the
daughter cells, leading to changes in the level of mutated
mtDNA within a dividing tissue.
60 62
The unequal partitioning
may be a purely random process,independent of any selection
caused by an effect of the mutation on mitochondrial
function. On the other hand, presumed shifts due to
functional selection may explain why the level of some patho-
genic mtDNA mutations decreases in blood during life (for
example, 0.5% to 1% per annum for A3243G
63
).
mtDNA “background,” nuclear genes, and the
environment
While there are a great many different heteroplasmic mtDNA
mutations, in epidemiological terms most patients with a
pathogenicmtDNAdefectharbouronlymutatedmtDNA(that
is, they are homoplasmic mutated).
64
The most common
example is LHON (Leber hereditary optic neuropathy).
64
LHON is a mitochondrial genetic disorder that is primarily
caused by mutations in mtDNA complex I (ND) genes and is
characterised by subacute bilateral visual failure presenting in
earlyadultlife.
65
LHONisintriguingbecauseitisessentiallyan
organ specific disease that principally affects the retinal
ganglioncellsandtheopticnerve.
66
LHONalsohasamarkedly
reduced penetrance with a clear sex bias, with only around
50% of men and around 10% of women developing visual
failure.
35 67 68
Most patients with LHON are homoplasmic
mutated for one of three mtDNA ND gene mutations (fig 4),
69
soheteroplasmycannotexplainthevarieddiseasepenetrance,
and certain unknown additional factors appear to be
important.
Wild-type (normal) mtDNA can be subdivided into
different genetic groups (haplogroups) based upon a charac-
teristic pattern of polymorphism that occurs within the
normal population.
70
Two of the three principal LHON mtDNA
mutations (T14484C in the ND6 gene and G11778A in the
ND4 gene) are preferentially associated with haplogroup J,
which is found in around 15% of northern Europeans.
71
The
reason for this association is not known, but it seems likely
that haplogroup J increases the penetrance of the T14484C
and G11778A mutations.
72
It therefore appears that the mito-
chondrial genetic background can influence disease expres-
sion, but this cannot explain the sex bias in LHON.
The segregation pattern of disease in some LHON families
suggests that there may be a nuclear genetic modifier locus
modulating the clinical expression of the LHON mtDNA
mutations.A recessive visual loss susceptibility locus on the X
chromosome would explain the sex bias in LHON,
73
but
attempts to identify the locus have not been successful.
74
EnvironmentalfactorsmayalsoplayapartinLHON.Thereare
many anecdotal reports of visual failure following alcohol
intoxication, starvation, heavy smoking, and head trauma,
68
but large studies have yielded conflicting results.
75 76
Figure 3 The human mitochondrial genome. The human
mitochondrial genome (mtDNA) is a small 16 569 kb molecule of
double stranded DNA. mtDNA encodes for 13 essential components
of the respiratory chain. ND1-ND6 and ND4L encode seven subunits
of complex I (NADH-ubiquinone oxidoreductase). CYT b is the only
mtDNA encoded complex III subunit (ubiquinol-cytochrome c oxidase
reductase). COX I to III encode for three of the complex IV
(cytochrome c oxidase, or COX) subunits, and the ATP 6 and ATP 8
genes encode for two subunits of complex V (ATP synthase). Two
ribosomal RNA genes (12S and 16S rRNA), and 22 transfer RNA
genes are interspaced between the protein encoding genes. These
provide the necessary RNA components for intramitochondrial
protein synthesis. D-loop, the 1.1 kb non-coding region which is
involved in the regulation of transcription and replication of the
molecule, and is the only region not directly involved in the synthesis
of respiratory chain polypeptides; O
H
and O
L
, the origins of heavy
and light strand mtDNA replication.
Mitochondria 1191
www.jnnp.com
In many ways LHON is best considered as a complex trait,
where the disease phenotype arises through multiple genetic
factors (both mitochondrial and nuclear) interacting with the
environment.Asimilarmechanismmightexplainthevariable
penetrance of other homoplasmic mtDNA mutations that
cause organ specific disease, such as the A1555G mtDNA
mutation in the 12S rRNA gene that causes maternally inher-
ited susceptibility to aminoglycoside induced deafness, and
possibly the A4300G mtDNA mutation in tRNA
Ile
that causes
maternally inherited cardiomyopathy (see table 1). Similar
nuclear–mitochondrial interactions are also likely to contrib-
ute to the varied phenotype seen in other mitochondrial
disorders,betheycausedbyprimarynDNAdefectsorprimary
mtDNA defects.
Nuclear genes and mtDNA heteroplasmy
After heteroplasmic mice were generated from laboratory
strains with two different mtDNA genotypes in the mid-90s
(see table 3),
44
it became clear that a particular mitochondrial
Table 1 Genetic classification of human mitochondrial disorders
Type of disorder
Inheritance
pattern
Mitochondrial genetic disorders*
Rearrangements (large scale partial deletions and duplications)
Chronic progressive external ophthalmoplegia (CPEO) S
Kearns-Sayre syndrome S
Diabetes and deafness S
Pearson marrow-pancreas syndrome S
Sporadic tubulopathy S
Point mutations
Protein encoding genes
• LHON (G11778A, T14484C, G3460A) M
• NARP/Leigh syndrome (T8993G/C) M
tRNA genes
• MELAS (A3243G, T3271C, A3251G) M
• MERRF (A8344G, T8356C) M
• CPEO (A3243G, T4274C) M
• Myopathy (T14709C, A12320G) M
• Cardiomyopathy (A3243G, A4269G, A4300G) M
• Diabetes and deafness (A3243G, C12258A) M
• Encephalomyopathy (G1606A, T10010C) M
rRNA genes
• Non-syndromic sensorineural deafness (A7445G) M
• Aminoglycoside induced non-syndromic deafness (A1555G) M
Nuclear genetic disorders
Disorders of mtDNA maintenance
Autosomal dominant progressive external ophthalmoplegia (with 2° multiple mtDNA deletions)
• Mutations in adenine nucleotide translocator (ANT1) AD
• Mutations in DNA polymerase γ (POLG) AD or AR
• Mutations in Twinkle helicase (C10orf2) AD
Mitochondrial neuro-gastrointestinal encephalomyopathy (with 2° multiple mtDNA deletions)
• Mutations in thymidine phosphorylase (TP) AR
Myopathy with mtDNA depletion
• Mutations in thymidine kinase (TK2) AR
Encephalopathy with liver failure
• Mutations in deoxyguanosine kinase (DGK) AR
Primary disorders of the respiratory chain
Leigh syndrome
• Complex I deficiency: mutations in complex I subunits (NDUFS2, 4, 7, 8, and NDUFV1) AR
• Complex II deficiency: mutations in complex II flavoprotein subunit (SDH) AR
Leukodystrophy and myoclonic epilepsy
• Complex I deficiency: mutations in complex I subunit (NDUFV1) AR
Cardioencephalomyopathy
• Complex I deficiency: mutations in complex I subunit (NDUFS2) AR
Optic atrophy and ataxia
• Complex II deficiency: mutations in complex II flavoprotein subunit (SDH) AD
Disorders of mitochondrial protein import
Dystonia-deafness
• Mutations in deafness-dystonia protein DDP1 (TIMM8A) XLR
Disorders of assembly of the respiratory chain
Leigh syndrome
• Complex IV deficiency: mutations in COX assembly protein (SURFI) AR
• Complex IV deficiency: mutations in COX assembly protein (COX10) AR
Cardioencephalomyopathy
• Complex IV deficiency: mutations in COX assembly protein (SCO2) AR
Hepatic failure and encephalopathy
• Complex IV deficiency: mutations in COX assembly protein (SCO1) AR
• Complex IV deficiency: mutations in protein affecting COX mRNA stability (LRPPRC) AR
Tubulopathy, encephalopathy, and liver failure
• Complex III deficiency: mutations in complex III assembly (BCS1L) AR
*mtDNA nucleotide positions refer to the L-chain, and are taken from the standard Cambridge reference
sequence). AD, autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; M, maternal; S, sporadic; XLR, X linked
recessive.
1192 Chinnery, Schon
www.jnnp.com
genome was favoured in some tissues, and the other
mitochondrial genome was favoured in others.
77
Detailed
experiments showed that this selective effect was not a result
of detectable differences in respiratory chain activity or rates
of mtDNA replication, and that the selection appeared to be
controlled at the level of the mtDNA molecule itself.
78
Recent
work has identified three specific nuclear genetic loci that
influence this process.
79
This has important implications for
our understanding of mtDNA diseases because the equivalent
genes in humans might influence the level of heteroplasmy in
different tissues and organs,and therefore modulate the clini-
cal phenotype.
Table 2 Clinical syndromes associated with mitochondrial disease
Syndrome Primary features Additional features
Chronic progressive external ophthalmoplegia
(CPEO)
External ophthalmoplegia and bilateral ptosis Mild proximal myopathy
Infantile myopathy and lactic acidosis (fatal
and non-fatal forms)
Hypotonia in the first year of life; feeding and
respiratory difficulties
Fatal form may be associated with a cardiomyopathy
and/or the Toni-Fanconi-Debre syndrome
Kearns-Sayre syndrome (KSS) PEO onset before age 20 with pigmentary
retinopathy, plus one of the following: CSF
protein >1 g/l, cerebellar ataxia, heart block
Bilateral deafness; myopathy; dysphagia; diabetes
mellitus and hypoparathyroidism; dementia
Leber hereditary optic neuropathy (LHON) Subacute painless bilateral visual failure;
male:female approx 4:1; median age of onset 24
years
Dystonia; cardiac pre-excitation syndromes
Leigh syndrome (LS) Subacute relapsing encephalopathy with
cerebellar and brain stem signs presenting during
infancy
Basal ganglia lucencies
Mitochondrial encephalomyopathy with lactic
acidosis and stroke-like episodes (MELAS)
Stroke-like episodes before age 40 years; seizures
and/or dementia; ragged-red fibres and/or lactic
acidosis
Diabetes mellitus; cardiomyopathy (hypertrophic
leading to dilated); bilateral deafness; pigmentary
retinopathy; cerebellar ataxia
Myoclonic epilepsy with ragged-red fibers
(MERRF)
Myoclonus; seizures; cerebellar ataxia; myopathy Dementia, optic atrophy; bilateral deafness; peripheral
neuropathy; spasticity; multiple lipomata
Neurogenic weakness with ataxia and retinitis
pigmentosa (NARP)
Late childhood or adult onset peripheral
neuropathy with associated ataxia and
pigmentary retinopathy
Basal ganglia lucencies; abnormal electroretinogram;
sensorimotor neuropathy
Pearson syndome Sideroblastic anaemia of childhood;
pancytopenia; exocrine pancreatic failure
Renal tubular defects
PEO, progressive external ophthalmoplegia.
Figure 4 Clinical features of mitochondrial disease. Mitochondrial disease may present with single organ involvement (sensorineural
deafness, diabetes, visual failure, myopathy, or cardiomyopathy), or multisystem involvement. It may be possible to recognise a specific clinical
syndrome (table 2), but often patients do not fit neatly into one particular category. The combination of neurological disease and
extraneurological involvement should raise the suspicion of a mitochondrial disorder.
Mitochondria 1193
www.jnnp.com
Outlook
The last five years have seen major advances in our
understanding of mitochondrial genetics and how mtDNA
mutations cause disease. Clinical expression is influenced by
heteroplasmy, mtDNA background, nuclear genes, and their
interaction with the environment. Evolutionary studies are
castinglightonthiscomplexrelation.Forexample,inthechar
(a fish), different environments, and particularly the water
temperature, have selected in favour of a particular mito-
chondrial genotype.
80
Recent work on humans suggests that
the same phenomenon may have occurred during population
migrations throughout the world.
81
Understanding these
processes is of fundamental importance for the clinical man-
agement of patients—from genetic counselling to developing
new treatments.
CONFIRMING SUSPECTED MITOCHONDRIAL
DISEASE
Our understanding of mitochondrial biochemistry and genet-
ics has important implications for the investigation of
suspected mitochondrial disease. In patients with a clearly
defined clinical syndrome it may be possible to confirm the
diagnosis with a simple molecular genetic test carried out on
DNA extracted from blood. A good example of this is Leber
hereditary optic neuropathy, where over 97% of cases are
caused by one three defined mtDNA point mutations that are
usually homoplasmic in blood.
82
A similar approach may also
be possible for nuclear genetic mitochondrial disorders (see
table1,althoughmostofthesegenetictestsarestillwithinthe
realms of research and are not part of a routine diagnostic
service). Investigating the remaining patients is more com-
plex,partlybecausemanydisordersmaymimicmitochondrial
disease and also because there is no one single test that will
prove or disprove whether a patient has a mitochondrial
disorder.Manydifferentgeneticdefectsinbothmitochondrial
and nuclear DNA can cause similar neurological disorders, so
rather than carry out a series of random genetic tests,it is bet-
ter to approach the problem systematically to identify and
characterise the underlying metabolic defect.
Heteroplasmy is the main problem when investigating
mtDNA disorders. Pathogenic mtDNA mutations may not be
detectable in blood using conventional techniques, and,
almost counterintuitively, direct sequencing of mtDNA is the
least robust technique of all.This means that a negative blood
test result does not exclude a particular genetic diagnosis (for
example,seeChinnery et al,1997
83
).Ifmitochondrialdiseaseis
suspected and the blood DNA tests are negative, the patient
shouldhaveamusclebiopsy(usuallythefirstchoiceinadults)
or a skin biopsy (usually the first choice in children). Urine
sediment, and to a lesser degree hair follicles, are excellent
sources for non-invasive mtDNA testing.
84
Fresh muscle can be analysed histologically and histo-
chemically for evidence of mitochondrial disease.Characteris-
tic features include ragged red fibres which can be seen with
theGomori-trichromestain
85
orwithsuccinatedehydrogenase
histochemistry.
86
The ragged red appearance is caused by the
subsarcolemmal accumulation of mitochondria and is
thought to be a response to metabolic stress within a diseased
muscle cell.
87
There may also be a reduction in cytochrome c
oxidase activity (COX, complex IV) either within some of the
fibres (a mosaic defect, suggestive of a mtDNA disorder,
88
but
see Sasarman et al,2002
89
) or affecting all the fibres within the
entire biopsy (suggesting a nuclear genetic defect).
Specialist centres carry out measurements of the individual
respiratory chain complexes,which may also provide a clue to
the underlying genetic defect. These can be done on fresh
muscle or cultured fibroblasts grown from a skin biopsy. If a
single complex is deficient, this points to a genetic defect in
the relevant coding region of mtDNA or nuclear DNA, or a
gene involved in the assembly of that particular complex. If
therearemultiplecomplexdefects,thatsuggestsageneralised
defect of protein synthesis, and an underlying mtDNA defect
involving a tRNA gene (including deletions that remove tRNA
genes), or perhaps a nuclear gene defect with secondary
effects on mtDNA. It is worth remembering that mito-
chondrial biochemical tests carried out on muscle and
fibroblasts in the laboratory measure mitochondrial function
under optimal conditions. It is therefore possible that there is
a functional defect of mitochondrial metabolism that is not
detectable in the laboratory (mutations in the ATPase 6 gene
causing NARP (neurogenic weakness with ataxia and retinitis
pigmentosa) are a good example of this pitfall). Evidence of
impaired mitochondrial function may only be apparent on
Table 3 Animal models of mitochondrial disease (adapted from Larsson and Rustin
47
)
Type Mouse model Gene (reference) Biochemical abnormality Phenotype
Nuclear gene
knockouts
Adenosine nucleotide translocase ANT1 (48) Defect of coupled
respiration
Myopathy and cardiomyopathy
Mitochondrial superoxide
dismutase
SOD2 (49) Mitochondrial superoxide
deficiency
Myopathy and cardiomyopathy
Mitochondrial transcription factor
A
Germ line TFAM, germ line (25) Respiratory chain defect Embryonic lethal. Abnormal
development with absence of heart
and optic disc
Heart specific TFAM, tissue specific (50) Respiratory chain defect Dilated cardiomyopathy and cardiac
conduction block
Pancreatic β cell specific TFAM, tissue specific (51) Respiratory chain defect Diabetes
COX assembly protein SURF-1 SURF1 (52) Respiratory chain defect Embryonic lethality
Thymidine phosphorylase TP (53) Reduction in liver TP
activity
None
Mitochondrial DNA BALB/NZB heteroplasmic NZB/BALB mtDNA (44) None Random drift during transmission.
Tissue specific selection of different
genotypes
Chloramphenicol resistance CAP-R T2443C mtDNA
(54)
None Myopathy, cardiomyopathy, perinatal
death
∆mtDNA 4.7 kb mtDNA deletion
(46)
Spontaneous mutants Defect of nuclear–mitochondrial
communication
Not known (55) None Deafness
1194 Chinnery, Schon
www.jnnp.com
clinical testing using techniques such as exercise testing with
lactate measurements,
90
magnetic resonance spectroscopy,
91
or
infrared spectroscopy.
92
A structured approach to investigation allows targeted
geneticanalysis,whichoftenmeansaSouthernblotofmuscle
mtDNA looking for a mtDNA rearrangement,a series of allele
specific assays looking for common point mutations of
mtDNA or nuclear DNA,and direct sequencing of the relevant
genes. A significant proportion of adults have rare or unique
mtDNA defects (that is, “private” mutations). These are iden-
tified by mtDNA sequencing which should also be carried out
on DNA extracted from muscle (but with the caveat noted
above).
Proving a mtDNA mutation is pathogenic
mtDNA is highly polymorphic, with any two individuals
differing at up to 60 base pairs (see the mtDNA sequence
databases in table 4). The variation is so great that it is not
unusual to find unique base changes in control individuals.
Thispresentsaparticularproblemwheninvestigatingpatients
with suspected mtDNA disorders—when is the base change a
neutral polymorphism and when is it pathogenic?
Five “canonical”criteria suggest that a novel base change is
pathogenic
29
:
• The mutation must not be a known polymorphism (as
describedononeoftheestablishedsequencedatabases,see
table 4).
• The base change must affect a site that has been conserved
during evolution.If the site is conserved across species then
it implies that it is functionally important, and a mutation
at this site is likely to be deleterious. The mutation must
also be in a region that is functionally important. This
essentially means anywhere in the tRNA genes, certain
regionsoftherRNAgenes,orcausinganaminoacidchange
in the protein encoding genes.
• Deleterious mutations are usually (but not exclusively)
heteroplasmic. This implies that the mutation occurred
recently and it has not had time to “fix” in the female line,
or that there has been selection against fixation acting at
the level of the organism.
• The mutation segregates with the disease clinically. For
heteroplasmic mutations this means that severely affected
individuals have a high percentage level of mutated
mtDNA, and unaffected individuals have a lower percent-
age level of mutated mtDNA.
• The mutation segregates with the disease biochemically.
This is usually achieved by single cell mtDNA analysis.
93
Individualmusclefibresaremicrodissectedfromthickcross
sections of muscle and the percentage level of mutated
mtDNA is measured in histochemically normal and abnor-
mal muscle fibres (either because they are ragged red or
COX deficient). For a pathogenic mutation, the percentage
levelofmutatedmtDNAwillbehigherinthepathologically
abnormal fibres.
MANAGING MITOCHONDRIAL DISEASE—THE
FUTURE
Making a specific genetic diagnosis is helpful in various ways.
It allows a comparison of that individual with other patients
described in published reports, providing some guide to prog-
nosis and highlighting complications that may evolve over
time (table 2). It also has implications for genetic counselling
(table 1).
94
Nuclear defects may be autosomal recessive, auto-
somal dominant, or sex linked. mtDNA defects may be
sporadic or maternally transmitted. There are no statistically
based robust counselling guidelines for mtDNA disease,
95
but
data collection is underway,and they should become available
over the next five years. Retrospective studies suggest that
measuring the percentage level of mutated mtDNA in the
mother will provide some guidance.
39 58
At present the management of mitochondrial disease is
largely supportive and aimed at identifying, preventing, and
treating complications wherever possible. Pharmacological
treatments have been used with varying degrees of success
(recently reviewed by Chinnery & Turnbull
96
).Limited clinical
trials have been carried out, but no consistent clinical
improvements have been demonstrated. A multicentre trial is
currently under way for dichloracetate to reduce lactic acido-
sis in MELAS patients.
Our understanding of the basic biology of mitochondrial
disease provides a basis for developing new treatments.
Several strategies have been employed to try and correct the
underlying genetic defect. The overall aim is to reduce the
proportion of mutated mtDNA to subthreshold levels. This
could be achieved by adding more wild-type mtDNA, or by
removing mutated mtDNA.
Adding wild-type mtDNA
Despite initial promise,
46
attempts to deliver synthetic
wild-type mtDNA into cells have not been successful. A more
attractive strategy is to move wild-type mitochondrial
genomes from one compartment to another—an approach
called “gene shifting”.
97–99
Healthy skeletal muscle contains
small precursors called satellite cells. Satellite cells proliferate
and fuse with the juxtapositionary mature skeletal fibres in
Table 4 Mitochondria on the world wide web
Information Name URL
Information for patients United Mitochondrial Diseases
Foundation (USA)
www.umdf.org
Mitolinks (UK) http://www.communigate.co.uk/ne/
mitolinks/index.phtml
Leber hereditary optic neuropathy
trust (UK)
www.leberstrust.btinternet.co.uk
Clinical and molecular
information for clinicians
and scientists
On-line Mendelian Inheritance in
Man
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov
Clinical and genetic
information for clinicians
and patients
Mitomap
Geneclinics
www.mitomap.org
www.geneclinics.org
Molecular data for scientists Uppsala http://www.genpat.uu.se/mtDB/
index.html
Biochemical and molecular
data for scientists
Mitop mips.gsf.de/proj/medgen/mitop
Mitodat http://www-lecb.ncifcrf.gov/mitoDat/
Mitochondria 1195
www.jnnp.com
response to stress and exercise.In some patients with mtDNA
myopathy,the percentage level of mutated mtDNA in satellite
cells is lower that the level in affected skeletal muscle. It is
possible to induce satellite cell proliferation by injecting a
toxin into muscle (such as bupivacaine)
97 98
or by exercising
the muscle.
99
Both techniques have been shown to deliver
wild-type mtDNA from the satellite cell compartment into
mature muscle fibres, to reduce the proportion of mutated
mtDNA within affected tissues,and to correct the biochemical
defect. Exercise also improves the strength and stamina of
patients with mtDNA myopathy
100
—but there are concerns
thatitmayalsoincreasetheamountofmutatedmtDNAinthe
muscle, leading to short term improvements that may be det-
rimental in the longer term.
101
Removing mutated mtDNA
Two strategies have been employed to remove mutated
mtDNA. Both are at the experimental stage, and both require
considerabledevelopmentbeforetheycanbeusedonpatients.
One approach has been to develop synthetic molecules that
bind to mutated mtDNA molecules and prevent them from
replicating,but allowing wild-type mtDNA replication to con-
tinue unimpeded.
102
While this strategy works in vitro, and it
appears that the “antigenomic” molecules can be delivered
into mitochondria,
103
so far it has not been possible to
influence the level of heteroplasmy in living cells. An alterna-
tive approach is to use drugs that select against mutated
mtDNA in dividing cells, allowing wild-type mtDNA levels to
increase.
104
All of these approaches have the same drawback—even if
they are effective, how can the treatments be delivered to the
nervous system and alter the mtDNA levels in non-dividing
cells? For this reason perhaps the best strategy is to remove all
mutated mtDNA at an early stage in development, by nuclear
transfer. By removing the nucleus from an affected zygote
with a mtDNA mutation and inserting it into a healthy
enucleateddonorwithnormalmtDNA,itshouldbepossibleto
form healthyoffspringthatdonotharbourthemtDNA defect,
thereby preventing the disease in that individual, and also
preventing further transmission of the disease. This approach
is currently at an experimental stage, but provides some hope
for the future.
ANIMAL MODELS
Various mouse models for mitochondrial disease have been
developed over the last five years. It is hoped that these mod-
els will advance our understanding of the pathophysiology
and will also be useful for developing new treatments (table
3). Most of the models were produced by nuclear gene
manipulation, and some bear clinical or pathological resem-
blances to human mitochondrial diseases. Developing a good
model for human mtDNA disorders is proving difficult
because it is currently not possible to transfect mammalian
mitochondria with exogenous DNA. To get around this prob-
lem, Inoue and colleagues fused synaptic nerve terminals
(synaptosomes) from aged mice harbouring low levels of
mtDNA deletions with cybrid cells.
105
They screened the cybrid
clones for detectable levels of mtDNA deletions and fused one
with a mouse zygote that was implanted into a foster mother.
The offspring contained a mixture of wild-type mtDNA and
mtDNA with a 4.7 kb deletion.These mice share some clinical
features with human mtDNA deletion disorders, but they
were remarkable in two respects. First, the mice developed a
nephropathy (a feature not typically found in KSS), and
second, the female offspring also harboured deleted mtDNA
(also not typical of KSS). Thus, like many other mouse mod-
els, there is not a complete correspondence between the
human and the murine phenotype. To some extent this is
inevitable—human mtDNA disorders are late onset diseases,
and it is difficult to mimic the effects of aging in other shorter
lived mammals. Attempts to generate mice transmitting
mtDNA point mutations similar to those found in humans
have not yet been forthcoming.
CONCLUSIONS
Mitochondria have an essential role in maintaining cellular
homeostasis, and their many functions integrate closely with
the cellular metabolic network.It is therefore naive to think of
mitochondria in isolation,and although we recognise primary
disorders of mitochondrial function, the cellular and clinical
consequences will depend on many other genetic and
environmental factors. Precisely how the jigsaw fits together
will vary from person to person. This presents a unique chal-
lenge to neurologists wanting to identify, diagnose, and man-
age patients and families with mitochondrial disease. In this
respect,areas for future development are highlighted in box 1.
These are not rare disorders.Recent epidemiological studies
have shown that as a group primary mitochondrial disorders
affect at least one in 8000 of the general population,
95
and that
number is likely to increase as the genotypic and phenotypic
spectrum expands. It is also becoming clear that mito-
chondrial dysfunction occurs in many common sporadic
neurological disorders, and there may be common mito-
chondrial mechanisms associated with certain neurological
phenotypes (a good example being the various forms of
hereditary spastic paraplegia). Our grasp of primary mito-
chondrial disorders will therefore have a much broader
relevance, helping us to understand many other diseases and
hopefully leading to novel generic treatments for neurological
diseases.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
PFC is funded by the Wellcome Trust and Ataxia (UK).EAS is funded
by the US National Institutes of Health, the Muscular Dystrophy
Association, and the National Organisation for Rare Diseases. We are
grateful to Dr Zofia Chrzanowska-Lightowlers for fig 2.
Box 1 Areas for future development
• GENETIC COUNSELLING – There are currently no
statistically-derived genetic counselling guidelines for
mtDNA disease. A multi-national consortium is currently
collecting data, and robust guidelines should become
available in the next few years when a large cohort has
been assembled.
• NUCLEAR–MITOCHONDRIAL INTERACTIONS – By study-
ing relatively rare mitochondrial disorders we will increase
our understanding of the way that mitochondria interact
with cellular metabolism and particularly the cell nucleus. It
is likely that this will have a broader relevance for other
neurological diseases.
• ANIMAL MODELS – We currently do not have a good
model for heteroplasmic mtDNA point mutation disorders
(such as “MELAS” or “MERRF” – see table 2), but there is
considerable effort worldwide to generate the model. Many
of the unanswered questions about genotype and
phenotype can be addressed when the model becomes
available, and it may be used to test new treatments.
• NOVEL TREATMENTS – There are currently no treatments
for mitochondrial disease, but various avenues show prom-
ise, and are likely to enter clinical practice within the next
decade (see text).
• ENVIRONMENTAL/EXTERNAL FACTORS – Although it is
generally accepted that exogenous factors influence
mitochondrial function in humans, identifying them is prov-
ing difficult. Population based studies and the further inves-
tigation of animal models are likely to provide some insight.
If these exogenous factors can be changed (by dietary or
pharmacological manipulation), this approach may open
up avenues for new treatments.
1196 Chinnery, Schon
www.jnnp.com
GLOSSARY
ANT: Adenine nucleotide translocator. A transporter protein
that exchanges ADP for ATP across the mitochondrial inner
membrane. There are various tissue specific isoforms of ANT.
Mutations in the nuclear gene ANT1 cause autosomal
dominant chronic progressive external ophthalmoplegia with
secondary mtDNA deletion formation (see table 1). There is a
mouse knockout model for the cardiac isoform of ANT (see
table 3).
Apoptosis: Programmed cell death. A critical process
essential for normal development and cell turnover. The
release of cytochrome c from the inner mitochondrial
membrane is one mechanism that can trigger apoptosis. This
is discussed in detail in other articles in this series.
ATP: Adenosine triphosphate. A high energy phosphate mol-
ecule produced by the respiratory chain from ADP. ATP is
required for all active cellular processes.
Cybrid cell: Cultured cell generated by fusing the cytoplasm
of one cell (cytoplast) with that of another.This technique can
be used to generate cell lines with different levels of
heteroplasmy on a specific nuclear genetic background.
Cytoplasmic transfer: Technique used to generate hetero-
plasmic mice. Cytoplasm containing mitochondria from one
inbred mouse strain (for example, NZB) are transferred and
fused with an early embryonic cell from another cell inbred
mouse strain (for example, BALB).
Genetic bottleneck (mitochondrial): A restriction in the
number of mitochondrial genomes during early development
of the female germ line causes a “sampling effect” which
results in great variation in the level of heteroplasmy among
the offspring of a heteroplasmic mother.
Haplogroup (mtDNA): mtDNA is highly polymorphic
within the general population. There are certain groups of
polymorphisms that reflect the maternal ancestry of a
particular individual. These large groups are called haplo-
groups, and they contain individual haplotypes.
Haplotype (mtDNA): A specific mitochondrial genotype
defined by a characteristic collection of mtDNA polymor-
phisms
Heteroplasmy: Mammalian cells contain many copies of
mtDNA. Patients with mtDNA disease often harbour a
mixture of mutated and wild-type mtDNA—a situation
known as heteroplasmy. The proportion of mutated mtDNA
can vary between zero and 100%.
Homoplasmy: Mammalian cells contain many copies of
mtDNA. Usually all of these copies are identical—a situation
known as homoplasmy.
Knockout: Type of mouse model where a specific nuclear
gene is removed.
Mitotic (vegetative) segregation: When a heteroplasmic
cell divides, the daughter cells may receive different amounts
of mutated mtDNA by chance.
mtDNA: Mitochondrial DNA. The 16 569 base pair circular
mitochondrial genome. Each cell contains thousands of
copies.
Oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS): Electrochemical
processcarriedoutbytherespiratorychain.Electronsreceived
from reduced cofactors are passed between the different
respiratory chain complexes; protons are pumped from the
mitochondrial matrix into the inter-membrane space generat-
ing the mitochondrial membrane potential. The influx of pro-
tonsthroughcomplexVisusedtogenerateATPfromADPand
inorganic phosphate.
POLG: Polymerase γ—the only mitochondrial DNA polymer-
ase. Mutations in the nuclear gene POLG1 are a common
cause of autosomal dominant and recessive chronic progres-
sive external ophthalmoplegia with secondary mtDNA dele-
tions (see table 1).
Polymorphism:Aphenotypicallyneutralnaturalvariationin
DNA code at a particular site. In strict terms a particular
sequencechangemustbepresentin1%ofthepopulationtobe
a polymorphism, but the term is often used to describe any
phenotypically neutral sequence variant.
Relaxedreplication:Unlike nuclear DNA which is only cop-
ied during cell division, mtDNA is continuously recycled
within the cell (while the overall amount is maintained at
roughly constant levels).
Respiratorychain:Agroupoffourenzymecomplexes(I–IV)
situatedontheinnermitochondrialmembrane.Togetherwith
ATP synthase (complex V), the respiratory chain is the final
common pathway for aerobic energy metabolism and the pro-
duction of ATP
Satellite cell: Muscle cell precursor situated adjacent to the
mature muscle fibre. Satellite cells proliferate in response to
muscle stress and fuse with the mature muscle fibre.
Threshold effect: Most mtDNA mutations only cause a bio-
chemical defect of the respiratory chain when the proportion
exceeds a critical threshold level. This threshold varies from
tissue to tissue, and from mutation to mutation.
Wild-type: Normal DNA found in the outbred population
.....................
Authors’ affiliations
P F Chinnery, Department of Neurology, The University of Newcastle
upon Tyne, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK
E A Schon, Departments of Neurology and of Genetics and
Development, Columbia University, New York, USA
REFERENCES
1 Luft R, Ikkos D, Palmieri G, et al. A case of severe hypermetabolism of
nonthyroid origin with a defect in the maintenance of mitochondrial
respiratory control: a correlated clinical, biochemical and morphological
study. J Clin Invest 1962;41:1776–804.
2 Shy GM, Gonatas NK, Perez M. Two childhood myopathies with
abnormal mitochondria. I. Megaconial myopathy. II. Pleioconial
myopathy. Brain 1966;89:133–58.
3 Rowland LP, Hays AP, Di Mauro S, et al. Diverse clinical disorders
associated with abnormalities of mitochondria. In: Scarlato G, Cerri C,
eds. Mitochondrial pathology in muscle diseases. Padova: Piccin,
1983:141–58.
4 Petty RK, Harding AE, Morgan-Hughes JA. The clinical features of
mitochondrial myopathy. Brain 1986;109:915–38.
5 Nass S, Nass MMK. Intramitochondrial fibres with DNA characteristics. J
Cell Biol 1963;19:593–629.
6 Anderson S, Bankier AT, Barrell BG, et al. Sequence and organization
of the human mitochondrial genome. Nature 1981;290:457–65.
7 Wallace DC, Singh G, Lott MT, et al. Mitochondrial DNA mutation
associated with Leber’s hereditary optic neuropathy. Science
1988;242:1427–30.
8 Holt I, Harding AE, Morgan-Hughes JA. Deletion of muscle mitochondrial
DNA in patients with mitochondrial myopathies. Nature
1988;331:717–19.
9 Servidei S. Mitochondrial encephalomyopathies: gene mutation.
Neuromuscul Disord 2003;13:109–14.
10 Schon EA, Bonilla E, DiMauro S. Mitochondrial DNA mutations and
pathogenesis. J Bioenerget Biomemb 1997;29:131–49.
11 Wallace DC. Mitochondrial diseases in mouse and man. Science
1999;283:1482–8.
12 DiMauro S. Mitochondrial encephalomyopathies: back to Mendelian
genetics. Ann Neurol 1999;45:693–4.
13 Shoubridge EA. Nuclear genetic defects of oxidative phosphorylation.
Hum Mol Genet 2001;10:2277–84.
14 Alexander C, Votruba M, Pesch UE, et al. OPA1, encoding a
dynamin-related GTPase, is mutated in autosomal dominant optic atrophy
linked to chromosome 3q28. Nat Genet 2000;26:211–15.
15 Rotig A, de Lonlay P, Chretien D, et al. Aconitase and mitochondrial
iron-sulphur protein deficiency in Friedreich ataxia. Nat Genet
1997;17:215–17.
16 Casari G, De Fusco M, Ciarmatori S, et al. Spastic paraplegia and
OXPHOS impairment caused by mutations in paraplegin, a
nuclear-encoded mitochondrial metalloprotease. Cell 1998;93:973–83.
17 Lutsenko S, Cooper MJ. Localization of the Wilson’s disease protein
product to mitochondria. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1998;95:6004–9.
18 Leonard JV, Schapira AVH. Mitochondrial respiratory chain disorders II:
neurodegenerative disorders and nuclear gene defects. Lancet
2000;355:389–94.
19 Van Goethem G, Dermaut B, Lofgren A, et al. Mutation of POLG is
associated with progressive external ophthalmoplegia characterized by
mtDNA deletions. Nat Genet 2001;28:211–12.
20 Nishino I, Spinazzola A, Hirano M. Thymidine phosphorylase gene
mutations in MNGIE, a human mitochondrial disorder. Science
1999;283:689–92.
Mitochondria 1197
www.jnnp.com
21 Saada A, Shaag A, Mandel H, et al. Mutant mitochondrial thymidine
kinase in mitochondrial DNA depletion myopathy. Nat Genet
2001;29:342–4.
22 Mandel H, Szargel R, Labay V, et al. The deoyguanosine kinase gene is
mutated in individuals with depleted hepatocerebral mitochondrial DNA.
Nat Genet 2001;29:337–41.
23 Kaukonen J, Juselius JK, Tiranti V, et al. Role of adenine nucleotide
translocator 1 in mtDNA maintenance. Science 2000;289:782–5.
24 Spelbrink JN,LiFY,TirantiV,et al. Human mitochondrial DNA
deletions associated with mutations in the gene encoding Twinkle, a
phage T7 gene 4-like protein localised in mitochondria. Nat Genet
2001;28:223–31.
25 Larsson NG, Wang J, Wilhelmsson H, et al. Mitochondrial transcription
factor A is necessary for mtDNA maintenance and embryogenesis in
mice. Nat Genet 1998;18:231–6.
26 Falkenberg M, Gaspari M, Rantanen A, et al. Mitochondrial
transcription factors B1 and B2 activate transcription of human mtDNA.
Nat Genet 2002;31:289–94.
27 Chinnery PF, Howell N, Andrews RA, et al. Clinical mitochondrial
genetics. J Med Genet 1999;36:425–36.
28 Leonard JV, Schapira AH. Mitochondrial respiratory chain disorders I:
mitochondrial DNA defects. Lancet 2000;355:299–304.
29 DiMauro S, Schon EA. Mitochondrial DNA mutations in human disease.
Am J Med Genet 2001;106:18–26.
30 Holt IJ, Harding AE, Petty RK, et al. A new mitochondrial disease
associated with mitochondrial DNA heteroplasmy. Am J Hum Genet
1990;46:428–33.
31 Tiranti V, Hoertnagel K, Carrozzo R, et al. Mutations of SURF-1 in Leigh
disease associated with cytochrome c oxidase deficiency. Am J Hum
Genet 1998;63:1609–21.
32 Ciafaloni E, Ricci E, Shanske S, et al. MELAS: clinical features,
biochemistry, and molecular genetics. Ann Neurol 1992;31:391–8.
33 Moraes CT, Ciacci F, Silvestri G, et al. Atypical clinical presentations
associated with the MELAS mutation at position 3243 of human
mitochondrial DNA. Neuromuscul Disord 1993;3:43–50.
34 Reardon W, Ross RJ, Sweeney MG, et al. Diabetes mellitus associated
with a pathogenic point mutation in mitochondrial DNA. Lancet
1992;340:1376–9.
35 Nikoskelainen EK. Clinical picture of LHON. Clin Neurosci
1994;2:115–20.
36 Prezant TR, Agapian JV, Bohlman MC, et al. Mitochondrial ribosomal
RNA mutations associated with both antibiotic-induced and
non-syndromic deafness. Nat Genet 1993;4:289–94.
37 King MP, Attardi G. Injection of mitochondria into human cells leads to a
rapid replacement of the endogenous mitochondrial DNA. Cell
1988;52:811–19.
38 Chinnery PF, Howell N, Lightowlers RN, et al. Molecular pathology of
MELAS and MERRF. The relationship between mutation load and clinical
phenotypes. Brain 1997;120:1713–21.
39 White SL, Collins VA, Woolfe R, et al. Genetic counseling and prenatal
diagnosis for the mitochondrial DNA mutations at nucleotide 8993. Am J
Hum Genet 1999;65:474–82.
40 Giles RE, Blanc H, Cann HM, et al. Maternal inheritance of human
mitochondrial DNA. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1980;77:6715–19.
41 Sutovsky P, Moreno RD, Ramalho-Santos J, et al. Ubiquitin tag for sperm
mitochondria. Nature 1999;403:371–2.
42 Schwartz M, Vissing J. Paternal inheritance of mitochondrial DNA. N
Engl J Med 2002;347:576–80.
43 Poulton J, Macaulay V, Marchington DR. Mitochondrial genetics ’98: Is
the bottleneck cracked? Am J Hum Genet 1998;62:752–7.
44 Jenuth J, Peterson AC, Fu K, et al. Random genetic drift in the female
germ line explains the rapid segregation of mammalian mitochondrial
DNA. Nat Genet 1996;14:146–51.
45 Meirelles F, Smith LC. Mitochondrial genotype segregation in a mouse
heteroplasmic lineage produced by embryonic karyoplast transplantation.
Genetics 1997;145:445–51.
46 Seibel P, Trappe J, Villani G, et al. Transfection of mitochondria: strategy
towards a gene therapy of mitochondrial DNA diseases. Nucleic Acids
Res 1995;23:10–17.
47 Larsson NG, Rustin P. Animal models for respiratory chain disease.
Trends Mol Med 2001;7:578–81.
48 Graham BH, Waymire KG, Cottrell B, et al. A mouse model for
mitochondrial myopathy and cardiomyopathy resulting from a deficiency
in the heart/muscle isoform of the adenine nucleotide translocator. Nat
Genet 1997;16:226–34.
49 Li Y, Huang TT, Carlson EJ, et al. Dilated cardiomyopathy and neonatal
lethality in mutant mice lacking manganese superoxide dismutase. Nat
Genet 1995;11:376–81.
50 Wang J, Wilhelmsson H, Graff C, et al. Dilated cardiomyopathy and
atrioventricular conduction blocks induced by heart-specific inactivation
of mitochondrial DNA expression. Nat Genet 1999;21:133–7.
51 Silva JP, Kohler M, Graff C, et al. Impaired insulin secretion and
beta-cell loss in tissue-specific knockout mice with mitochondrial diabetes.
Nat Genet 2000;26:336–40.
52 Agostino A, Invernizzi F, Tiveron C, et al. Constitutive knockout of Surf1
is associated with high embryonic lethality, mitochondrial disease and
cytochrome c oxidase deficiency in mice. Hum Mol Genet
2003;12:399–413.
53 Haraguchi M, Tsujimoto H, Fukushima M, et al. Targeted deletion of
both thymidine phosphorylase and uridine phosphorylase and
consequent disorders in mice. Mol Cell Biol 2002;22:5212–21.
54 Sligh JE, Levy SE, Waymire KG, et al. Maternal germ-line transmission of
mutant mtDNAs from embryonic stem cell-derived chimeric mice. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 2000;97:14461–6.
55 Johnson KR, Zheng QY, Bykhovskaya Y, et al. A nuclear–mitochondrial
DNA interaction affecting hearing impairment in mice. Nat Genet
2001;27:191–4.
56 Chinnery PF, Thorburn DR, Samuels DC, et al. The inheritance of
mitochondrial DNA heteroplasmy: random drift, selection or both? Trends
Genet 2000;16:500–5.
57 Brown DT, Samuels DC, Michael EM, et al. Random genetic drift
determines the level of mutant mitochondrial DNA in human primary
oocytes. Am J Hum Genet 2001;68:553–36.
58 Chinnery PF, Howell N, Lightowlers RN, et al. MELAS and MERRF: the
relationship between maternal mutation load and the frequency of
clinically affected offspring. Brain 1998;121:1889–94.
59 Bogenhagen D, Clayton DA. Mouse L cell mitochondrial DNA
molecules are selected randomly for replication throughout the cell cycle.
Cell 1977;11:719–27.
60 Birky CW. The inheritance of genes in mitochondria and chloroplasts:
laws, mechanisms, and models. Annu Rev Genet 2001;35:125–48.
61 Chinnery PF, Samuels DC. Relaxed replication of mtDNA: a model with
implications for the expression of disease. Am J Hum Genet
1999;64:1158–65.
62 Birky CW. Relaxed and stringent genomes: why cytoplasmic genes don’t
obey Mendel’s laws. J Heredity 1994;85:355–65.
63 ’t Hart LM, Jansen JJ, Lemkes HHPJ, et al. Heteroplasmy levels of a
mitochondrial gene mutation associated with diabetes mellitus decrease
in leucocyte DNA upon aging. Hum Mutat 1996;7:193–7.
64 Chinnery PF, Johnson MA, Wardell TM, et al. Epidemiology of
pathogenic mitochondrial DNA mutations. Ann Neurol
2000;48:188–93.
65 Howell N. Leber hereditary optic neuropathy: mitochondrial mutations
and degeneration of the optic nerve. Vision Res 1997;37:3495–507.
66 Saadati HG, Hsu HY, Heller KB, et al. A histopathologic and
morphometric differentiation of nerves in optic nerve hypoplasia and
Leber hereditary optic neuropathy. Arch Ophthalmol 1998;116:911–16.
67 Newman NJ, Lott MT, Wallace DC. The clinical characteristics of
pedigrees of Leber’s hereditary optic neuropathy with the 11 778
mutation. Am J Ophthalmol 1991;111:750–62.
68 Riordan-Eva P, Sanders MD, Govan GG, et al. The clinical features of
Leber’s hereditary optic neuropathy defined by the presence of a
pathogenic mitochondrial DNA mutation. Brain 1995;118:319–37.
69 Man PY, Griffiths PG, Brown DT, et al. The epidemiology of Leber
hereditary optic neuropathy in the north East of England. Am J Hum
Genet 2003;72:333–9.
70 Torroni A, Huoponen K, Francalacci P, et al. Classification of European
mtDNAs from an analysis of three European populations. Genetics
1996;144:1835–50.
71 Torroni A, Petrozzi M, D’Urbano L, et al. Haplotype and phylogenetic
analyses suggest that one European-specific mtDNA background plays a
role in the expression of Leber hereditary optic neuropathy by increasing
the penetrance of the primary mutations 11778 and 14484. Am J Hum
Genet 1997;60:1107–21.
72 Howell N, Kubacka I, Halvorson S, et al. Phylogenetic analysis of the
mitochondrial genomes from Leber hereditary optic neuropathy
pedigrees. Genetics 1995;140:285–302.
73 Bu X, Rotter JI. X chromosomal-linked and mitochondrial gene control of
Leber hereditary optic neuropathy: evidence from segregation analysis
for dependence on X-chromosome inactivation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
1991;88:8198–202.
74 Chalmers RM, Davis MB, Sweeney MG, et al. Evidence against an
X-linked visual loss susceptibility locus in Leber hereditary optic
neuropathy. Am J Hum Genet 1996;59:103–8.
75 Kerrison JB, Miller NR, Hsu F, et al. A case–control study of tobacco
and alcohol consumption in Leber hereditary optic neuropathy. Am J
Ophthalmol 2000;130:803–12.
76 Tsao K, Aitken PA, Johns DR. Smoking as an aetiological factor in a
pedigree with Leber’s hereditary optic neuropathy. Br J Ophthalmol
1999;83:577–81.
77 Jenuth JP, Peterson AC, Shoubridge EA. Tissue-specific selection for
different mtDNA genotypes in heteroplasmic mice. Nat Genet
1997;16:93–5.
78 Battersby BJ, Shoubridge E. Selection of a mtDNA sequence variant in
hepatocytes of heteroplasmic mice is not due to difference in respiratory
chain function or efficiency of replication. Hum Mol Genet
2001;10:2469–79.
79 Battersby BJ, Loredo-Osti JC, Shoubridge EA. Nuclear genetic control of
mitochondrial DNA segregation. Nat Genet 2003;33:183–6.
80 Blier PU, Dufresne F, Burton RS. Natural selection and the evolution of
mtDNA-encoded peptides: evidence for intergenomic co-adaptation.
Trends Genet 2001;17:400–6.
81 Mishmar D, Ruiz-Pesini E, Golik P, et al. Natural selection shaped
regional mtDNA variation in humans. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
2003;100:171–6.
82 Mackey DA, Oostra R-J, Rosenberg T, et al. Primary pathogenic mtDNA
mutations in multigeneration pedigrees with Leber hereditary optic
neuropathy. Am J Hum Genet 1996;59:481–5.
83 Chinnery PF, Reading PJ, Walls TJ, et al. Recurrent strokes in a 34 year
old man. Lancet 1997;350:560.
84 Dubeau F, De Stefano N, Zifkin BG, et al. Oxidative phosphorylation
defect in the brains of carriers of the tRNA
leu(UUR)
A3243G mutation in a
MELAS pedigree. Ann Neurol 2000;47:179–85.
85 Engel WK, Cunningham CG. Rapid examination of muscle tissue: an
improved trichrome stain for fresh-frozen biopsy sections. Neurology
1963;13:919–23.
1198 Chinnery, Schon
www.jnnp.com
86 Old SL, Johnson MA. Methods of microphotometric assay of succinate
dehydrogenase and cytochrome c oxidase activities for use on human
skeletal muscle. Histochem J 1989;21:545–55.
87 Hayashi J, Ohta S, Kikuchi A, et al. Introduction of disease-related
mitochondrial DNA deletions into HeLa cells lacking mitochondrial DNA
results in mitochondrial dysfunction. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
1991;88:10614–18.
88 Johnson MA, Bindoff LA, Turnbull DM. Cytochrome c oxidase activity in
single muscle fibres: assay techniques and diagnostic applications. Ann
Neurol 1993;33:28–35.
89 Sasarman F, Karpati G, Shoubridge EA. Nuclear genetic control of
mitochondrial translation in skeletal muscle revealed in patients with
mitochondrial myopathy. Hum Mol Genet 2002;11:1669–81.
90 Taivassalo T, Abbott A, Wyrick P, et al. Venous oxygen levels during
aerobic forearm exercise: an index of impaired oxidative metabolism in
mitochondrial myopathy. Ann Neurol 2002;51:38–44.
91 Argov Z, Bank W. Phosphorus magnetic resonance spectroscopy (31-P
MRS) in Neuromuscular disorders. Ann Neurol 1991;30:90–7.
92 van Beekvelt MC, van Engelen BG, Wevers RA, et al. Quantitative
near-infrared spectroscopy discriminates between mitochondrial
myopathies and normal muscle. Ann Neurol 1999;46:667–70.
93 Moraes CT, Schon EA. Detection and analysis of mitochondrial DNA
and RNA in muscle by in situ hybridization and single-fiber PCR.
Methods Enzymol 1996;264:522–40.
94 Thorburn DR, Dahl HHM. Mitochondrial disorders: genetics, counseling,
prenatal diagnosis and reproductive options. Am J Med Genet
2001;106:102–14.
95 Poulton J, Turnbull DM. 74th ENMC International workshop:
mitochondrial diseases. Neuromuscul Disord 2000;10:460–2.
96 Chinnery PF, Turnbull DM. The epidemiology and treatment of
mitochondrial disease. Am J Med Genet 2001;106:94–101.
97 Fu K, Hartien R, Johns T, et al. A novel heteroplasmic tRNA
leu(UUR)
mtDNA
point mutation in a sporadic patient with mitochondrial
encephalomyopathy segregates rapidly in muscle and suggests an
approach to therapy. Hum Mol Genet 1996;5:1835–40.
98 Clark K, Bindoff LA, Lightowlers RN, et al. Correction of a mitochondrial
DNA defect in human skeletal muscle. Nat Genet 1997;16:222–4.
99 Taivassalo T, Fu K, Johns T, et al. Gene shifting: a novel therapy for
mitochondrial myopathy. Hum Mol Genet 1999;8:1047–52.
100 Taivassalo T, Matthews PM, De Stefano N, et al. Combined aerobic
training and dichloracetate improve exercise capacity and indices on
aerobic metabolism in muscle cytochrome oxidase deficiency. Neurology
1996;47:529–34.
101 Taivassalo T, Shoubridge EA, Chen J, et al. Aerobic conditioning in
patients with mitochondrial myopathies: physiological, biochemical, and
genetic effects. Ann Neurol 2001;50:133–41.
102 Taylor RW, Chinnery PF, Turnbull DM, et al. Selective inhibition of
mutant human mitochondrial DNA replication in vitro by peptide nucleic
acids. Nat Genet 1997;15:212–15.
103 Chinnery PF, Taylor RW, Diekert K, et al. Peptide nucleic acid delivery
into human mitochondria. Gene Ther 1999;6:1919–28.
104 Manfredi G, Gupta N, Vazquez-Memije ME, et al. Oligomycin induces
a decrease in the cellular content of a pathogenic mutation in the human
mitochondrial ATPase6 gene. JBiolChem1999;274:9386–91.
105 Inoue K, Nakada K, Ogura A, et al. Generation of mice with
mitochondrial dysfunction by introducing mouse mtDNA carrying a
deletion into zygotes [In Process citation]. Nat Genet 2000;26:176–81.
K77K77K77K2EK6AK6EK6EK70K2EK63K6FK6D
K43K69K74K65K54K72K61K63K6B K77K69K6CK6C K61K6CK65K72K74 K79K6FK75 K62K79 K65K6DK61K69K6C K77K68K65K6EK65K76K65K72 K6EK65K77 K63K6FK6EK74K65K6EK74 K69K6E K74K68K65 K4AK6FK75K72K6EK61K6C K6FK66 K4EK65K75K72K6FK6CK6FK67K79K2C K4EK65K75K72K6FK73K75K72K67K65K72K79K2C K61K6EK64 K50K73K79K63K68K69K61K74K72K79 K6FK72
K61 K70K61K72K74K69K63K69K70K61K74K69K6EK67 K6AK6FK75K72K6EK61K6C K69K73 K70K75K62K6CK69K73K68K65K64 K74K68K61K74 K6DK61K74K63K68K65K73 K63K72K69K74K65K72K69K61 K79K6FK75 K77K61K6EK74 K74K6F K74K72K61K63K6B
K54K6FK70K69K63K73K3A K54K65K6CK6C K43K69K74K65K54K72K61K63K6B K77K68K69K63K68 K77K6FK72K64K73 K6FK72 K73K75K62K6AK65K63K74K73 K74K6F K77K61K74K63K68 K66K6FK72 K69K6E K6EK65K77 K63K6FK6EK74K65K6EK74
K41K75K74K68K6FK72K73K3A K42K65 K61K6CK65K72K74K65K64 K77K68K65K6EK65K76K65K72 K6BK65K79 K61K75K74K68K6FK72K73 K79K6FK75 K61K72K65 K66K6FK6CK6CK6FK77K69K6EK67 K70K75K62K6CK69K73K68 K61 K6EK65K77 K70K61K70K65K72
K41K72K74K69K63K6CK65K73K3A K4BK6EK6FK77 K77K68K65K6EK65K76K65K72 K61 K70K61K70K65K72 K6FK66 K69K6EK74K65K72K65K73K74 K74K6F K79K6FK75 K69K73 K72K65K66K65K72K65K6EK63K65K64 K62K79 K61K6EK6FK74K68K65K72 K70K61K70K65K72
K43K69K74K65K54K72K61K63K6B K73K65K72K76K69K63K65
K49K73 K79K6FK75K72 K70K61K70K65K72 K62K65K69K6EK67 K63K69K74K65K64K3F
Mitochondria 1199
www.jnnp.com
