Mannella
form
20
tubular
between
mitochondria.
topology;
10 years, the technique of electron tomography – employ- inner membranes
1763
ing advanced, higher voltage electron microscopes and
computer-based reconstruction algorithms – has afforded
biologists true three-dimensional images of mitochondria, first
in thick plastic sections [3–8] and more recently in frozen-
hydrated suspensions [8–10] or tissue sections [11,12]. While
the results have underscored the tremendous pleomorphism of
the mitochondrial inner membrane, they also point to conserved
design principles and to an important role for membrane
dynamics in maintaining membrane morphology. Moreover,
these studies suggest that the diversity in inner membrane shape
The mitochondrion is structurally defined, in large measure,
by its two membranes: a limiting outer membrane that enwraps
the energy-transducing inner membrane, which in turn encloses
a dense, protein-rich matrix. The outer membrane is topolog-
ically simple, varying in shape depending on whether the
mitochondrion is in a cell (usually tubular when attached to the
cytoskeleton, sometimes reticulated) or isolated in suspension
(ellipsoidal or spherical). The inner membrane, which has a
larger surface area than the outer membrane, contains features
were provided over 50 years ago by transmission electron
microscopy (TEM) of thin sections of chemically fixed and
plastic-embedded specimens [1]. It was soon apparent that the
mitochondrial inner membrane can assume an astounding
variety of morphologies [2], even though it has the same two
basic functions in every cell: to serve as the scaffold for the
assembly and operation of the respiratory chain complexes, and
to provide the permeability barrier across which the respiratory
machinery generates its chemiosmotic gradient. In the last
are affected (or even effected) by changes in mitochondrial
membrane topology, e.g., by altering the diffusion of metabo-
lites and proteins between internal compartments [4,8,10]. This
review is intended to highlight recent findings relevant to the
influence of inner membrane shape on mitochondrial function
and the identification of factors that, in turn, regulate this
membrane's topology.
1. Morphology and implied dynamics of mitochondrial
The first images of the internal structure of mitochondria The growing implication is that certain mitochondrial functions
Review
Structure and dynamics of the mitocho
Carmen A.
Resource for Visualization of Biological Complexity, Wadsworth
Received 3 April 2006; received in revised
Available online
Abstract
Three-dimensional images of mitochondria provided by electron tomography
membrane are connected to the periphery of this membrane by narrow
strongly suggest that inner membrane topology represents a balance
developed is that inner membrane topology is a regulated property of
membrane shape influences mitochondrial function and, conversely, what
© 2006 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Mitochondria; Electron microscopy; Electron tomography; Membrane
Biochimica et Biophysica Acta
and the changes observed under certain conditions might not be
random, but rather might reflect a novel regulatory mechanism.
⁎
Tel.: +1 518 474 2462; fax: +1 518 402 5381.
E-mail address: carmen@wadsworth.org.
0167-4889/$ - see front matter © 2006 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.bbamcr.2006.04.006
ndrial inner membrane cristae
⁎
Center, Empire State Plaza, Albany, NY 12201-0509, USA
6 April 2006; accepted 10 April 2006
April 2006
reveal that the micro-compartments (cristae) defined by the inner
junctions, which likely restrict diffusion. The tomograms also
membrane fusion and fission processes. The hypothesis being
This review summarizes the evidence about how inner
is known about the factors that determine this membrane's topology.
Bioenergetics; Cardiolipin
(2006) 542–548
http://www.elsevier.com/locate/bba
referred to as cristae (literally, crests) which have long been
represented as simple infoldings of this membrane [1,7].
Although this “baffle” interpretation was not universally
accepted (e.g., [13]), it rapidly found its way into the textbooks.
Subsequent electron tomographic analyses of a variety of
the inner membrane. Condensed (matrix compacted) mitochon-
dria (Fig. 2, also Fig. 1) have larger internal compartments with
multiple tubular connections to the peripheral region and to
each other. Interconversion of these states can only be achieved
by the inner membrane undergoing fusion and fission [8].
Matrix compression is accompanied by fusion of individual
cristae into larger compartments, while matrix expansion
requires fissioning of the large cisternae into individual tubes
or lamellae and (with extreme matrix swelling) recruitment of
membrane from the interior to the periphery. Analyses of a
variety of mitochondria reveal inner membrane morphologies
that appear to represent extreme states of membrane fusion or
fission (Fig. 3). Thus, the ‘typical’ crista morphology
represented by mitochondria like those of Figs. 1 and 2 likely
represents a balance between intra-mitochondrial membrane
fusion and fission processes [10]. As discussed below, this
Fig. 1. Model derived from cryo-electron tomography of the membranes in an
intact, frozen-hydrated mitochondrion isolated from rat liver. This mitochon-
drion has a diameter of 700 nm.
543C.A. Mannella / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1763 (2006) 542–548
mitochondria, isolated and in situ, have provided overwhelming
evidence that cristae are not simply random folds in the inner
membrane but rather internal compartments formed by
invagination of the membrane (Figs. 1 and 2). These
invaginations originate at narrow neck-like segments, called
pediculi cristae (crista feet) when first detected by conventional
TEM [13] and later crista junctions [5].
Rat-liver mitochondria display highly variable crista mor-
phology, even within a single organelle. In the frozen-hydrated
mitochondrion shown in Fig. 1, the inner membrane comprises
curved, tubular regions that co-exist or merge with flattened
lamellar segments. The overall impression is one of a highly
fluid, interconnected membrane continuum. Hackenbrock [14]
defined two morphologic states in chemically fixed mitochon-
dria, condensed and orthodox, which differed primarily in the
relative states of expansion or contraction of the matrix and
intracristal compartments. Three-dimensional analyses of rat-
liver mitochondria in these states indicate major differences in
inner membrane topology (Fig. 2). Cristae in the orthodox
(matrix expanded) state tend to be tubes or short flat lamellae
with one or two openings (junctions) in the peripheral region of
Fig. 2. Change in mitochondrial inner membrane topology associated with the orthodox-c
Elsevier Science. Model on right reproduced from C.A. Mannella, (2004) Mitochondri
Chemistry (W.J. Lennarz and M.D. Lane, eds), vol. 2, pp. 720–724, with permission
500 nm.
raises the possibility that inner membrane morphology is
regulated, at least in part, by the same types of proteins that
control inter-mitochondrial fission and fusion.
2. Sites of inner membrane invagination: crista junctions
Tubular connections between cristae and the peripheral or
boundary region of the mitochondrial inner membrane have
been observed in mitochondria from protozoa (amoeba),
fungi, and metazoa from nematodes to flies to mammals [3–
9,15–17]. The junctions have been shown to form spontane-
ously in yeast mitochondria after extreme osmotic swelling
and re-contraction of the inner membrane, indicating that their
formation is energetically favored [8]. However, while crista
junctions are ubiquitous, they are not structurally constant.
Perkins et al. reported that crista junctions in neuronal
mitochondria have uniformly circular cross-sections with
diameters of ∼28 nm [5]. However, in rat-liver mitochondria
the cross-section of the junctions can vary from circular to
elliptical (short slots) with openings typically in the range
20–50 nm [3,4,8]. The crista junctions in Neurospora
mitochondria have been reported to be exclusively slot-like
ondensed transition. Model on left reproduced from [4] with permission of
al Membranes, Structural Organization, in Encyclopedia of Biological
of Elsevier Science. Mitochondria (left to right) have diameters of 1500 nm and
Acta 1763 (2006) 542–548544 C.A. Mannella / Biochimica et Biophysica
[9,16]. However, intact frozen-hydrated Neurospora mito-
chondria have both circular and slot-like crista junctions
(Mannella, Marko, Hsieh, unpublished results).
It is unclear whether the formation of crista junctions is
dependent on or supported by specific mitochondrial protein
or lipid components. On the one hand, membrane invagina-
tions with short neck-like junctions are predicted to occur
when a flexible spherical membrane increases in area while
nested inside a second, rigid sphere [18]. Thus, formation of
tubular crista junctions might be a spontaneous lipid-mediated
process requiring nothing more than the rate of inner
membrane biogenesis exceeding that of the outer membrane.
On the other hand, certain mutations and pathological
conditions are associated with unattached cristae, suggesting
derangement in mechanisms that normally stabilize the crista
junctions (Fig. 3 and below). One of the rare cases of total
absence of crista junctions is associated with the relict
mitochondrion of the anaerobic pathogen, Cryptosporidium
parvum [19]. This organism lacks a functioning respiratory
chain but has a single mitochondrion, probably retained for
iron–sulfur metabolism. The inner membrane of the relict
mitochondrion is highly convoluted but does not have crista
junctions (Fig. 4).
Overexpression of membrane proteins in E. coli can cause
expansion and infolding of the inner, cytoplasmic membrane. In
one case, the infoldings of the bacterial inner membrane were
Fig. 3. Extreme mitochondrial inner membrane topologies reflecting an imbalance of
diameter) with “vesicular” cristae from a patient with Senger's syndrome. (Reproduced
Lowerleft:yeastmitochondrion(1200nmdiameter)with “vesicular” cristaeformedfollowing
permission of IUBMB Life, Taylor Francis Group.) Upper right: mouse liver mitochon
[10] with permission of Elsevier Science.) Lower right: segment of a fasting amoeba
membrane segment is 800 nm. (Reproduced from [7] with permission of Elsevier Science).
shownbyelectrontomographytoberandom,lackingthetubular
junctions typical of mitochondrial cristae [20]. By contrast,
magnetotactic bacteria contain so-called magnetosomes, linear
membrane fusion and fission. Upper left: heart muscle mitochondrion (1000 nm
with permission from M. Huizing, PhD thesis, University of Nijmegen, 1998.)
extremeosmoticswellingand recontraction.(Reproducedfrom[8]with
drion (900 nm diameter) after brief exposure to tBid [25]. (Reproduced from
mitochondrion showing paracrystalline arrangement of cristae. Length of outer
Fig. 4. Relict mitochondrion from the anaerobic pathogen Cryptosporidium par-
vum,havingahighlyfoldedinnermembranethatlackscristajunctions.Scalebar=
100 nm. (Reproduced from [19] with permission of Blackwell Publishing, Inc.).
arraysof∼50-nmmagnetitecrystalscontainedinsidemembrane
vesicles formed by invagination of the inner membrane. These
invaginations have been shown, by cryo-electron tomography,
to occur at short, neck-like membrane junctions that form in the
membrane even in the absence of the magnetic particles [21].
Thus, it is possible, perhaps likely, that mitochondrial crista
junctions are formed and stabilized by specific, conserved
mechanisms shared with the mitochondrion's bacterial
ancestors.
3. Functional implications of inner membrane topology
An early inference from the 3D images of mitochondria
provided by electron tomography was that narrow tubular
junctions might restrict diffusion between intracristal compart-
ments and the peripheral intermembrane space [4]. Williams
[22] and Tedeschi [23] have commented separately on the
bioenergetic implications of the new model for inner
membrane organization: localized, kinetically controlled pro-
ton flow as opposed to the original description of delocalized
chemiosmosis of Mitchell [24]. In fact, there are several
indications in the recent literature that the topology of the
mitochondrial inner membrane might directly affect specific
mitochondrial functions and, therefore, that changes in inner
membrane morphology might represent a novel form of
metabolic regulation.
3.1. Bioenergetics: the condensed to orthodox morphological
transition
Computer simulations by Moraru and colleagues indicate
that ADP depletion could occur inside large intracristal
compartments of condensed mitochondria connected by long
narrow tubular segments to the inner boundary membrane [8].
The simulations predict that restricted diffusion of ADP cannot
keep up with its utilization inside these micro-compartments,
leading to diminished local production of ATP. Isolated rat-liver
mitochondria were first shown by Hackenbrock to switch from
condensed to orthodox state when [ADP] drops during the
conversion from respiratory state 3 to state 4 [14]. Thus, this
familiar but poorly understood morphological transition (Fig. 2)
may have a functional basis: elimination of diffusion bottle-
necks that would otherwisereduce efficiencyofATPproduction
[10].
3.2. Apoptosis: tBid-induced remodeling of the inner membrane
Isolated mouse liver mitochondria undergo a dramatic
change in inner membrane morphology after incubation for a
few minutes with thetruncated form of thepro-apoptotic protein
Bid (Fig. 3) [25]. This remodeling, marked by a reversal in
curvature of the cristae membranes, results in increased
interconnectivity of the intracristal spaces and a widening of
cristae junctions. Concomitantly, there is a mobilization and
C.A. Mannella / Biochimica et Biophysic
more complete release of internal stores of cytochrome c,
suggesting that the tBid-induced inner-membrane remodeling is
an integral step in the apoptotic pathway.
3.3. Oxidative stress: cubic transition in mitochondrial
membranes of amoeba
The mitochondrial cristae of many protozoa are tubular. In
the case of the amoeba, Chaos carolinensis, fasting induces a
remarkable morphological transition in the cristae, resulting in
formation of a paracrystalline labyrinth of wide interconnected
compartments with cubic symmetry (Fig. 3) [15].This
structural transition coincides with increased intracellular
production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) associated with
breakdown of internal carbon stores [26], suggesting that this
type of membrane remodeling – also observed in other
membrane systems associated with oxidative stress (see
discussion in [26]) – might represent a protective mechanism
to help clear ROS from the organelles.
4. Factors that affect inner membrane topology
The topology of a membrane is a complex function of
intrinsic and extrinsic factors, including: spontaneous curvature
(protein and lipid composition), dynamics (ability to undergo
fusion and fission), and binding to other cellular constituents
(such as membrane-bending proteins, cytoskeletal filaments,
and even other membranes). In the case of the mitochondrial
inner membrane, its physical interactions with the outer
membrane likely have a major effect on its shape. For example,
as noted above, the very existence of a volume-constraining
outer membrane may play an important role in initiating crista
invagination; and contacts or attachments of the two mem-
branes, through ∼10 nm bridging particles detected by cryo-
electron tomography [8,10], may serve to keep the inner
membrane extended. Likewise, there are obvious effects of the
protein-rich matrix on inner membrane shape, in terms of
setting a minimum volume below which the space bounded by
the membrane can collapse. Whether there are more direct
interactions, such as binding of the inner surface of cristae to a
“mitoskeleton” (analogous to the interactions of endoplasmic
reticulum with the cytoskeleton) is unknown.
The intrinsic factors involved in the formation of crista
junctions and in the structural transitions (remodeling) de-
scribed in the previous section have, until recently, been largely
a matter of conjecture. However, new findings are beginning to
implicate several mitochondrial inner membrane components as
regulators of this membrane's topology.
4.1. tBid, adenine nucleotide translocator, and cardiolipin
As noted above, tBid triggers a remodeling of mouse liver
mitochondria, involving reversal of curvature of the crista
membranes [25]. Epand et al. have observed that tBid induces
reversed curvature in cardiolipin-containing membrane phases
[27], suggesting that the remodeling of the cardiolipin-rich
mitochondrial inner membrane might be lipid-mediated, i.e., a
direct effect of tBid on the organization of lipids in these
545a Acta 1763 (2006) 542–548
membranes. Further evidence in support of this hypothesis has
been provided by studies involving the adenine nucleotide
translocator (ANT), the inner membrane carrier protein which
synthase recently has been described in Drosophila [17]. This
mutation (ATP6
1
) causes marked reduction in ATP production
in neuronal mitochondria and very unusual inner membrane
topology: rounded crista compartments contiguous with
flattened lamellar regions of the same membrane (Fig. 5). A
possible explanation for this highly unusual topological
transition is that ATP synthase dimerization is normally
inhibited in flat, lamellar cristae and that the ATP6
1
mutation
somehow weakens the inhibition, allowing complex dimeriza-
tion and, consequently, increased membrane curvature.
4.3. Mitofilin
Mitofilin is a 90-kDa inner-membrane protein, with
predicted membrane anchor and coiled-coil domains, that is
present at high levels in heart mitochondria but which, until
recently, had no obvious function. John et al. recently have
reported that down-regulation of mitofilin in HeLa cells by
siRNA results in the formation of concentric onion-like inner
mitochondrial membranes [37]. The mitofilin-deficient mito-
chondria tend to form progressively larger membrane sworls,
which were analyzed by electron tomography. The larger inner-
membrane structures were found to be composed of a complex,
interconnected network of membranes totally lacking tubular
Acta 1763 (2006) 542–548
binds cardiolipin and requires it for activity [28,29]. Gonsalvez
et al. recently have reported that tBid inhibits ANT activity of
yeast mitochondria in a cardiolipin-dependent manner, consis-
tent with this inhibition being an indirect effect of tBid on
cardiolipinorganization [30].Interestingly,Klingenbergandco-
workers reported three decades earlier that ANT ligands, such
as the inhibitor atractyloside (ATR), induce a morphological
change in beef heart mitochondria [31] that, in retrospect,
appears equivalent to the tBid induced remodeling of rat liver
mitochondria (Fig. 3). Klingenberg et al. recognized the change
in inner membrane shape as a reversal in membrane curvature
and attributed it to a ligand-induced “re-orientation” of a mobile
carrier protein to the matrix side of the membrane. However,
Klingenberglater questioned whether the stoichiometry of ANT
could be sufficient to cause so dramatic a change in inner
membrane structure [32]. An alternative explanation might be
that ligand-induced conformational changes in ANT cause a
reorganization of the cardiolipin in the inner membrane, similar
to that attributed to tBid, which, in turn, triggers the inner
membrane remodeling. Of course, the possibility cannot be
excluded that tBid (like ATR) directly interacts with ANT and
that the reversal of curvature that both induce in the
mitochondrial inner membrane is protein-mediated, i.e., due
to a conformational change in the carrier protein, as originally
suggested by Klingenberg et al. Distinguishing between these
possibilities will require a better understanding of the nature of
the interactions of tBid with cardiolipin and with ANT. It is
worth noting, in this context, another inducer of reversed
mitochondrial inner membrane curvature, cytochalasin B. This
polycyclic antibiotic, best known for its inhibition of actin
polymerization, was found by Coleman and Hermina in 1974 to
induce a change in the inner-membrane morphology of rat-liver
mitochondria very similar to that caused by ATR (and later
tBid), which they attributed to interaction of the antibiotic with
ANT [33]. In fact, the effects of cytochalasin-B and tBid on
ADP-stimulated (state 3) respiration and respiratory control
were both shown to be similar to those of ATR [30,33].
4.2. ATP synthase
The mitochondrial F
1
F
0
-ATP synthase complex has been
strongly implicated in contributing to the curvature of the inner
membrane as a result of its oligomerization. Paumard et al. have
shown that mutations in ATP synthase subunit e (also called
Atp21p and, formerly, Tim11p) inhibit formation of the ATP
synthase dimer (the first step in formation of larger oligomers)
and results in appearance of concentric onion-like cristae [34].
More recently, single-particle electron microscopic studies from
two laboratories [35,36] have revealed the likely basis for the
membrane bending ability of ATP synthase. Since the lateral
dimension of the membrane-embedded F
0
domain (at which
dimer binding occurs) is considerably less that that of the extra-
bilayer F
1
domain, lateral close-packing causes the complexes
to be tilted with respect to each other and so imparts a local bend
546 C.A. Mannella / Biochimica et Biophysica
to the membrane of 40° in the case of beef heart ATP synthase
[35] and 70° for the algal complex [36]. A mitochondrial DNA
mutation in the gene encoding subunit 6 (F
0
domain) of the ATP
Fig. 5. Brain mitochondrion from Drosophila bearing a mutation in the
mitochondrial DNA gene for subunit 6 of ATP synthase. (A) Projection image
from a 200-nm-thick plastic section of brain. (B) Single 2-nm-thick slice from
the tomographic reconstruction. (C, D) Front and back views of the membrane
surfacesin the tomogram. (E–F) Zoom-in views of cristae, showingflat lamellar
regions contiguous with dilated compartments. (Reproduced from [17] with
permission of the Society of Neuroscience).
connections to each other or to the peripheral inner membrane.
John et al. have proposed that mitofilin's physiological role is to
maintain normal crista morphology, in particular, the formation
or stabilization of crista junctions.
4.4. Mitochondrial dynamin-like proteins
As mentioned, three-dimensional images provided by
electron tomography strongly suggest that the topology of the
inner mitochondrial membrane represents a balance between
membrane fusion and fission processes [10]. Studies are
ongoing in several laboratories of mitochondria from organisms
in which proteins involved in mitochondrial dynamics are
mutated, knocked out, or up/down regulated. One such protein,
mgm1 (called OPA1 in humans), is a member of the dynamin
family of GTP-binding proteins. It is found on the outer surface
of the mitochondrial inner membrane and generally considered
to be involved in mitochondrial fusion [38,39]. Griparic et al.
found that reduced expression (by siRNA) of OPA1 in HeLa
cells causes cristae “disorganization”, with indications of local
matrix dilation and mitochondrial constrictions [40]. Continuity
between different membrane regions (as in the case of the
ATP6
1
mutant) was not determined. However, tomographic
analyses are in progress for a C. elegans mgm1 mutant and for
yeast mitochondria in which expression of mgm1p has been
down-regulated (Van der Bliek, Pain and Mannella, unpub-
lished results). Interestingly, Amutha et al. have reported that
mgm1p is required for oligomerization of ATP synthase [41].
Thus, it might be informative to use tomography to directly
compare the effects of mgm1 deficiency and ATP synthase
dimer inhibition on the topology of mitochondrial inner
membranes in the same organism.
5. Conclusions
The 3D images of mitochondria provided by electron
tomography have led to a re-examination of standard concepts
about mitochondrial membrane organization and even rekindled
some old (and, frankly, unsettled) arguments about the basic
tenets of chemiosmosis. The growing likelihood that many of
the topological changes undergone by the inner membrane
reflect alterations to internal diffusion pathways with functional
impact is spurring on the search for the molecular determinants
(intrinsic and extrinsic) of inner membrane shape. Likewise,
visualization of the interesting and complex micro-compart-
ments inside mitochondria is sharpening the realization that
ultimate modeling of cellular energy metabolism will have to
include the effects of mitochondrial inner membrane topology.
Technological developments in instrumentation and computa-
tion are in progress that promise to improve the resolution in
electron tomographic reconstructions of native (frozen-hydrat-
ed) organelles, cells and tissue. Sorting out the molecular
signatures on mitochondrial membranes and inside the different
compartments (matrix, intermembrane and intracristal) is a
C.A. Mannella / Biochimica et Biophysic
daunting challenge but one which, if successfully met, could
provide important information needed for a complete descrip-
tion of mitochondrial energy metabolism.
Acknowledgments
Many collaborators have contributed to the work summa-
rized in this review, including Drs. Ion Moraru, Leslie Loew,
Douglas Pfeiffer, Yuru Deng, Luca Scorrano, Jan Keithly,
Jiping Zha, and Michael Palladino. Special thanks are due to the
team at theResourcefor Visualization of Biological Complexity
(RVBC) who have developed the techniques of electron
tomography and helped apply them to the study of mitochon-
dria, in particular, Michael Marko, Karolyn Buttle, Chyongere
Hsieh, David Barnard, and Drs. Joachim Frank, Christian
Renken, Bimal Rath, ArDean Leith, Pawel Penczek (now at the
University of Texas-Houston Medical School) and Michael
Radermacher (now at the University of Vermont-Burlington).
Development of electron tomography at the RVBC is supported
by the National Center for Research Resources, NIH, grant
RR01219.
References
[1] N. Rasmussen, Mitochondrial structure and the practice of cell biology in
the 1950 s, J. History Biol. 28 (95 A.D.) 381–429.
[2] E.A. Munn, The Structure of Mitochondria, Academic Press, London,
1974.
[3] C.A. Mannella, M. Marko, P. Penczek, D. Barnard, J. Frank, The internal
compartmentation of rat-liver mitochondria: tomographic study using the
high-voltage transmission electron microscope, Microsc. Res. Tech. 27
(1994) 278–283.
[4] C.A. Mannella, K. Buttle, M. Marko, Reconsidering mitochondrial struc-
ture:newviewsofanoldorganelle,TrendsBiochem.Sci.22(1997)37–38.
[5] G. Perkins, C. Renken, M.E. Martone, S.J. Young, M. Ellisman, T. Frey,
Electron tomography of neuronal mitochondria: three-dimensional struc-
ture and organization of cristae and membrane contacts, J. Struct. Biol. 119
(1997) 260–272.
[6] G. Perkins, T.G. Frey, Recent structural insights into mitochondria gained
by microscopy, Micron 31 (2000) 97–111.
[7] T.G. Frey, C.A. Mannella, The internal structure of mitochondria, Trends
Biochem. Sci. 25 (2001) 319–324.
[8] C.A. Mannella, D.R. Pfeiffer, P.C. Bradshaw, I. Moraru, B. Slepchenko,
L.M. Loew, C. Hsieh, K. Buttle, M. Marko, Topology of the mitochondrial
inner membrane: dynamics and bioenergetic implications, IUBMB Life 52
(2001) 93–100.
[9] D. Nicastro, A.S. Frangakis, D. Typke, W. Baumeister, Cryo-electron
tomography of neurospora mitochondria, J. Struct. Biol. 129 (2000)
48–56.
[10] C.A. Mannella, The relevance of mitochondrial membrane topology to
mitochondrial function, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Mol. Basis Disease 1762
(2006) 140–147.
[11] C.-E. Hsieh, M. Marko, J. Frank, C.A. Mannella, Electron tomographic
analysis of frozen-hydrated tissue sections, J. Struct. Biol. 138 (2002)
63–73.
[12] C.-E. Hsieh, M. Marko, A. Leith, C.A. Mannella, J. Frank, Towards high-
resolution three-dimensional imagingof nativemammaliantissue: electron
tomography of frozen-hydrated rat liver sections, J. Struct. Biol. 153
(2006) 1–13.
[13] W.T. Daems, E. Wisse, Shape and attachment of the cristae mitochon-
driales in mouse hepatic cell mitochondria, J. Ultrastruct. Res. 16 (1966)
123–140.
[14] C.R. Hackenbrock, Ultrastructural bases for metabolically linked mechan-
ical activity in mitochondria. I. Reversible ultrasturctural changes with
changeinmetabolicsteadystateinisolatedlivermitochondria,J.CellBiol.
547a Acta 1763 (2006) 542–548
30 (1966) 269–297.
[15] Y. Deng, M. Marko, K. Buttle, A. Leith, M. Mieczkowski, C.A. Mannella,
Cubic membrane structure in amoeba (Chaos carolinensis) mitochondria
determined by electron microscopic tomography, J. Struct. Biol. 127
(1999) 231–239.
[16] G.Perkins,C.Renken,I.VanderKlei,M.Ellisman,W.Neupert,T.G.Frey,
Electron tomography of mitochondria after the arrest of protein import
associated with Tom19 depletion, Eur. J. Cell Biol. 80 (2001) 139–150.
[17] A.M. Celotto, A.C. Frank, S.W. McGrath, T. Fergestad, W.A. Van
Voorhies, K.F. Buttle, C.A. Mannella, M.J. Palladino, Mitochondrial
encephalomyopathy in Drosophila, J. Neurosci. 26 (2006) 810–820.
[18] C. Renken, G. Siragusa, G. Perkins, L. Washington, J. Nulton, P. Salamon,
T.G. Frey, A thermodynamic model describing the nature of the crista
junction:astructuralmotifinthemitochondrion,J.Struct.Biol.138(2002)
137–144.
J.S. Keithly, S.G. Langreth, K.F. Buttle, C.A. Mannella, Electron
tomographic and ultrastructural analysis of the Cryptosporidium parvum
relict mitochondrion, its associated membranes, and organelles, J.
Eukaryotic Microbiol. 52 (2005) 132–140.
[20] J. Lefman, P. Zhang, T. Hirai, R.M. Weis, J. Juliani, D. Bliss, M. Kessel, E.
Bos, P.J. Peters, S. Subrimaniam, Three-dimensional electron microscopic
imaging of membrane invaginations in Escherichia coli overproducing the
[30] F. Gonzalvez, F. Pariselli, P. Dupaigne, I. Budihardjo, M. Lutter, B.
Antonsson, P. Diolez, S. Manson, J.-C. Martinou, M. Goubern, X. Wang,
S. Bernard, P.X. Petit, tBid interaction with cardiolipin primarily
orchestrates mitochondrial dysfunctions and subsequently activates Bax
and Bak, Cell Death Differ. 12 (2005) 614–626.
[31] M. Klingenberg, B. Scherer, L. Stengel-Rutkowski, M. Buchholz, K.
Grebe, Experimental demonstration of the reorienting (mobile) carrier
mechanism exemplified by the mitochondrial adenine nucleotide translo-
cator, in: G.F. Azzone (Ed.), Mechanisms in Bioenergetics, Academic
Press, Inc., New York and London, 1973, pp. 257–284.
[32] M. Klingenberg, The ADP-ATP carrier in mitochondrial membranes, in:
A. Martonosi (Ed.), The Enzymes of Biological Membranes, vol. 3,
Plenum Publishing Corp., New York, 1976, pp. 383–438.
193–204.
[34] P. Paumard, J. Vallier, B. Coulary, J. Schaeffer, V. Soubannier, D.M.
Mueller, D. Brethes, J.-P. di Rago, J. Velours, The ATP synthase is
involved in generating mitochondrial cristae morphology, EMBO J. 21
548 C.A. Mannella / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1763 (2006) 542–548
chemotaxis receptor Tsr, J. Bacteriol. 186 (2004) 5052–5061.
[21] A. Komeili, Z. Li, D.K. Newman, G.J. Jensen, Magnetosomes are cell
membrane invaginations organized by the actin-like protein MamK,
Science 311 (2006) 242–245.
[22] R.J.P. Williams, Mitochondria and chloroplasts: localized and delocalized
bioenergetic transduction, Trends Biochem. Sci. 25 (2000) 479.
[23] H. Tedeschi, Old and new data, new issues: the mitochondrial ΔΨ,
Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Bioenerg. 1700 (2005) 195–202.
[24] P. Mitchell, Keilin's respiratory chain and its chemiosmotic consequences,
Science 206 (1979) 1148–1159.
[25] L. Scorrano, M. Ashiya, K. Buttle, S.A. Oakes, C.A. Mannella, S.J.
Korsmeyer, A distinct pathway remodels mitochondrial cristae and
mobilizes cytochrome c during apoptosis, Dev. Cell 2 (2002) 55–67.
[26] Y. Deng, S. Kohlwein, C.A. Mannella, Fasting induces cyanide-resistant
respiration and oxidative stress in the amoeba Chaos carolinensis:
implications for the cubic structural transition in mitochondrial mem-
branes, Protoplasma 219 (2002) 160–167.
[27] R.F. Epand, J.-C. Martinou, M. Fornallaz-Mulhauser, D.W. Hughes, R.M.
Epand, The apoptotic protein tBid promotes leakage by altering membrane
curvature, J. Biol. Chem. 277 (2002) 32632–32639.
[28] B. Hoffman, A. Stockl, M. Schlame, K. Beyer, M. Klingenberg, The
reconstituted ADP/ATP carrier's activity has an absolute requirement for
cardiolipin as shown in cysteine mutants, J. Biol. Chem. 269 (1994)
1940–1944.
[29] K. Beyer, M. Klingenberg, ADP/ATP carrier protein from beef heart
mitochondria has high amounts of cardiolipin, as revealed by
31
P nuclear
magnetic resonance, Biochemistry 24 (1985) 3821–3826.
(2002) 221–230.
[35] F. Minauro-Sanmiguel, S. Wilkens, J.J. Garcia, Structure of dimeric
mitochondrial ATP synthase: Novel F0 bridging features and the structural
basis of mitochondrial cristae biogenesis, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.
102 (2005) 12356–12358.
[36] N. Dudkina, J. Heinemeyer, W. Keegstra, E.J. Boekema, H.-P. Braun,
Structure of dimeric ATP synthase from mitochondria: an angular
association of monomers induces the strong curvature of the inner
membrane, FEBS Lett. 579 (2005) 5769–5772.
[37] G.B. John, Y. Shang, L. Li, C. Renken, C.A. Mannella, J.M.L. Selker, L.
Rangall, M.J. Bennett, J. Zha, The mitochondrial inner membrane protein
mitofilin controls cristae morphology, Mol. Biol. Cell 16 (2005)
1543–1554.
[38] H. Sesaki, S.M. Southard, M.P. Yaffe, R.E. Jensen, Mgm1p, a dynamin-
related GTPase, is essential for fusion of the mitochondrial outer
membrane, Mol. Biol. Cell 14 (2003) 2342–2356.
[39] E.D. Wong, J.A. Wagner, S.V. Scott, V. Okreglak, T.J. Holewinske, A.
Cassidy-Stone, J. Nunnari, The intramitochondrial dynamin-related
GTPase, Mgm1p, is a component of a protein complex that mediates
mitochondrial fusion, J. Cell Biol. 160 (2003) 303–311.
[40] L. Griparic, N.N.van der Welt, I.J. Orozco, P.J. Peters, A.M.van der Bliek,
Loss of the intermembrane space protein Mgm1/OPA1 induces swelling
and localized constrictions along the lengths of mitochondria, J. Biol.
Chem. 279 (2004) 18792–18798.
[41] B. Amutha, D.M. Gordon, Y. Gu, D. Pain, A novel role of Mgm1p, a
dynamin-related GTPase, in ATP synthase assembly and cristae formation/
maintenance, Biochem. J. 381 (2004) 19–23.
[33] P.S. Coleman, N.S. Hermina, The effects of cytochalasin-B on the
membranes of enzymatically active mitochondria, J. Bioenerg. 6 (1974)
[19]
